http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Ano: 2014 – Volume: 7 – Número: 2

ONLINE READING COMPREHENSION: CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES *
COMPREENSÃO DA LEITURA ONLINE: DESAFIOS E OPORTUNIDADES

Julie Coiro/University of Rhode Island
ABSTRACT: This paper details a number of challenges and opportunities for today’s
learners when reading for information on the Internet. After defining online reading
comprehension from a new literacies perspective and how it appears to be different than
offline reading comprehension, I highlight details about four of the biggest challenges for
today’s learners. These include 1) understanding and becoming proficient with the new
literacy skills and practices needed for online research; 2) developing a special kind of
digital wisdom that focuses on learning how to learn with the Internet; 3) taking on new
roles in a digital culture that expects learners to actively participate and contribute with
new knowledge as a member of their community; and 4) developing positive attitudes
toward using the Internet for academic work. The second part of the paper shares
examples of how skilled online readers can use the steps of online inquiry to think more
deeply about topics that interest them; develop a personal voice as they share ideas with
others; and work collaboratively to build meaning and new digital products that enable
them to make a difference in their world, or matter. You can explore the research and
resources from this presentation in more depth at <http://coiroevidosol.wikispaces.com/>.
KEYWORDS: online reading comprehension; online inquiry; digital literacy; reading on the
Internet; online readers.
RESUMO: Este artigo detalha alguns desafios e oportunidades para o aprendiz
contemporâneo, quando ele lê para obter informações na Internet. Depois de definir a
compreensão da leitura online pela perspectiva dos novos letramentos e de mostrar como
ela parece se diferir da leitura do impresso, eu destaco detalhes a respeito de quatro dos
maiores desafios para os aprendizes na atualidade. Eles incluem: 1) compreender e se
tornar proficiente nas habilidades dos novos letramentos e nas práticas necessárias para
a pesquisa na Internet; 2) desenvolver um tipo especial de conhecimento digital que
focaliza o aprender a aprender com a Internet; 3) a assumir novos papéis na cultura digital
que espera que alunos, como membros de uma comunidade, participem ativamente e
contribuam com ela trazendo novos conhecimentos; e 4) o desenvolvimento de atitudes
positivas em relação ao uso da Internet para o trabalho acadêmico. Na segunda parte do
artigo compartilho exemplos de como leitores de Internet habilidosos podem usar as
etapas da pesquisa online para pensar mais profundamente sobre temas que interessam
a eles; como podem desenvolver sua própria voz quando eles trocam idéias com outras
pessoas; e de como eles podem trabalhar de forma colaborativa para construir sentidos e
produtos digitais que lhes permitam fazer a diferença em seu mundo, ou naquele assunto.
Você pode explorar a pesquisa e os recursos usados nesta apresentação de forma mais
aprofundada no <http://coiroevidosol.wikispaces.com/>.
*

Virtual paper presented for the Annual Meeting of the XI Encontro Virtual de Documentação em Software
Livre (EVIDOSOL) e VIII Congresso Internacional de Linguagem e Tecnologia online (CILTEC-online).
30

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Ano: 2014 – Volume: 7 – Número: 2

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: compreensão da leitura online; pesquisa online; letramento digital;
leitura na Internet; leitores online.
1 Introduction
In this paper, I will share some of the key things I have learned in my research
about the challenges and opportunities encountered when reading for information on the
Internet. After defining what I mean by online reading comprehension from a new literacies
perspective and how it appears to be different than offline reading comprehension, I will
highlight details about four of the biggest challenges for today’s learners. These include 1)
understanding and becoming proficient with the new literacy skills and practices needed
for online research; 2) developing a special kind of digital wisdom that focuses on learning
how to learn with the Internet; 3) taking on new roles in a digital culture that expects
learners to actively participate and contribute new knowledge as a member of their
community; and 4) developing positive attitudes toward using the Internet for academic
work.
In the second part of the paper, I will share some examples of how skilled online
readers can use the steps of online inquiry to think more deeply about things that interest
them; develop a personal voice as they share ideas with others; and work collaboratively
to build meaning and new digital products that enable them to make a difference in their
world, or matter. Students often tell me how empowered they feel when the things they
learn, create, and share with the Internet “matter” to people in the real world outside of
their classroom. You can explore the research and resources from this presentation in
more depth at <http://coiroevidosol.wikispaces.com/>.

2 A new literacies perspective of online reading comprehension
For several years, I have worked with other members of The New Literacies
Research Team here in the United States to better understand what reading on the
Internet entails. In our work, we have found that sometimes, students are more literate
than their teachers with certain aspects of using the Internet – especially in terms of using
mobile phones and digital media for socializing outside of school. However, much of my
research suggests that students require additional skills to be able to read and effectively
comprehend information online.
When we think about how best to teach these new skills, it is not enough to put the
responsibility on the computer teacher or the librarian. And it is not enough to think that
students will develop all of these skills on their own. Instead, I believe it is the responsibility
of every reading and writing teacher to find ways to explicitly teach online reading
comprehension as an important part of the regular literacy curriculum.
So, now you might be wondering, how does the process of reading comprehension
change when you read on the Internet? Our research (LEU; KINZER; COIRO; CASTEK;
HENRY, 2013) suggests there are at least five ways that reading is different on the
Internet, as shown in Figure 1.
First, rather than starting with a book that someone hands you, on the Internet, you
often begin with a problem or a question that you type into a search engine, looking for
31

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Ano: 2014 – Volume: 7 – Número: 2

your own texts to learn more or to come up with a solution. As you start looking for texts,
there are many more texts to select from than you could find on a shelf in the library, and
there are lots of different skills required to use search engines to quickly find what you
need.

1. You begin by identifying an important problem.
2. There are new ways of locating information.
3. There are new reasons for critically evaluating information.
4. There are new contexts for synthesizing information that answers your questions.
5. There are new ways of communicating your answers to other people.
Figure 1: How does reading for information change on the Internet?

Once you locate some texts that are relevant, online readers are expected to take
on much of the responsibility that editors used to have in printed books. Since anyone with
an Internet connection can publish online, it’s even more important to make judgments
about the quality of the author and the validity of the information. Another way that literacy
and learning changes on the Internet is that online readers encounter information in so
many different formats (e.g., text, multimedia, images, audio, video). This suggests that
new organizational skills and composing practices are needed to synthesize and
communicate your message to others in a digital format. Unfortunately, each of these
differences presents new challenges for some online readers. Let’s take a look at some of
these challenges.

3 Initial evidence of new online reading comprehension skills and strategies
Our new literacies research team has collected data with pretty clear evidence that
suggests these online reading skills and strategies are somehow new and different
compared to those needed to read and comprehend printed text. In Figure 2, you see a
scatterplot of findings from a study we used to measure the relationship between scores
on two types of reading assessments (LEU; CASTEK; HARTMAN; COIRO; HENRY;
KULIKOWICH; LYVER, 2005). Along the bottom axis, you see the range of scaled scores
that 89 seventh grade students received on a state standardized multiple choice
comprehension test called the Connecticut Mastery Test (CMT). Along the left axis, you
see the range of scores students received on a test of online reading comprehension.
This online reading assessment measured students’ ability to locate online
information with search engines, critically evaluate the quality of that information, and
synthesize and communicate their key findings on a blog. Each of the colored dots
represents the relationship between one student’s scores on both measures. If offline
reading and online reading were the same, the data points would fall in a positive diagonal
line. That is, we would expect a low offline reader to also be a low online reader; an
average offline reader to be an overage online reader; and a highly skilled offline reader to
be highly skilled online reader.
32

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Ano: 2014 – Volume: 7 – Número: 2

However, the data points are scattered all over the plot, with virtually no significant
relationship between offline and online reading comprehension (r = .19 NS). In fact, the
purple dot in the upper left quadrant represents a student who scored the lowest in offline
reading, but one of the highest scores in online reading. This surprised us a lot. And, the
green dot in the bottom right quadrant represents a reader who received one of the highest
scores in offline reading, but one of the lowest scores in online reading. This finding
surprised us even more. Together, these findings suggest that something different may be
required to read and comprehend information on the Internet than is required to
comprehend printed texts.

Figure 2: scatterplot illustrating the correlation between students’ scores on a measure of offline reading
comprehension (CMT) and online reading comprehension.

4 Additional evidence of new online reading comprehension skills and strategies
Figure 3 shows the results of my dissertation study (COIRO, 2011). In this study,
120 students completed two assessments of online reading and one assessment of offline
reading. Participants were 118 ethnically, economically, and academically diverse seventhgrade students (51 males, 67 females) from six middle schools.
For the study, online reading comprehension was assessed through a series of
three related information requests. These online information requests were contained
within an Internet treasure hunt designed by two fictitious seventh graders, James P. and
Natasha R. from Australia, to invite students to use the Internet as part of a cooperative
information exchange. Each instrument included 20 open-ended items constructed to
measure aspects of reading comprehension while locating, critically evaluating,
synthesizing, and communicating online information. The guiding question for the first
treasure hunt (ORCA-Scenario I) was “What in the world is carbon monoxide poisoning
and why should you be worried about it?” ORCA-Scenario II was framed as James and
33

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Ano: 2014 – Volume: 7 – Número: 2

Natasha’s second online science project and required students to learn a few more
important things about the respiratory system and the dangers of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
Results of a hierarchical regression analysis suggested that, after accounting for
students’ performance in offline reading comprehension (which predicted 35% of their
online reading ability) and their prior knowledge about the topic (which predicted 11% of
their online reading ability), 15.4% of the variance in their scores was predicted by these
statistically unique aspects of online reading comprehension.
The important point here is that when middle school students read for information
on the Internet, online reading skills seem to predict at least 15% above and beyond what
they would typically need to know in order to comprehend printed text. Other studies
provide additional evidence that online reading comprehension involves different skills and
practices than offline reading comprehension (see AFFLERBACH, CHO, 2009; COIRO,
DOBLER, 2007; HARTMAN, MORSINK, ZHENG, 2010; KINGSLEY, 2010; COIRO, 2011).
Table 1: Variance in online reading comprehension ability explained by regression of scores on a
standardized assessment of offline reading comprehension, a measure of prior knowledge, and an
assessment of online reading comprehension.

R2
Offline Reading

Additional R2
Prior
Knowledge

Comprehension
.351*
NS

Additional R2
Online Reading

Total R2

Comprehension
.074 NS

.154*

.579*

= not significant. ** p < .05

In addition to just being new, research also suggests that online reading is much
more complex than offline reading. The RAND model of offline reading comprehension
(2002) highlights four sets of factors that influence comprehension. These include
characteristics of the text, the activity, the reader, and the context. Yet, Hartman, Morsink,
& Zheng (2010) explain how online reading comprehension requires two additional sets of
factors, including characteristics of different technologies and different authors (with whom
readers interact). This means there are at least six different sets of factors that influence
comprehension at each website a reader visits!
Further, because each new click can result in a completely different kind of text and
use of technology by a different author that requires different tasks and activities, reading
on the Internet becomes that much more complicated each time the mouse is clicked.
These complicated differences are important to think about as more and more students
are reading on the Internet for school assignments. We can no longer assume that the
students who read well in books will also be the students who read well on the Internet.

34

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Ano: 2014 – Volume: 7 – Número: 2

5 What Challenges Do Learners Encounter When They Interact with People and
Information Online?
5.1 Challenge 1. Developing proficiency with aspects of online reading
comprehension
So, what skills do students think are important for being a good online reader?
When a higher-performing seventh grade online reader was asked this question, she
explained:
Well, I’d say - concentration…immunity to the rest of the sites once you click on
one. And being a good internet searcher - meaning when you know exactly what to
click on without having to think twice about it, and when you click on it, it’s
reliable….I’d say it’s about 25% luck, 74% skill, and 1% wit – I really can’t
understand it all myself but …they mold right into a perfect circle and it works
correctly!

The key ideas in her explanation suggest that good online readers realize that the
same skills and practices that research suggests are important aspects of online reading
comprehension are the things they need to be good - locating information efficiently,
determining which information is most relevant and also most credible, and then having
positive attitudes about online reading (or “wit” as this student calls it) to be flexible and
have a sense of humor when things get hard.
Findings from several other studies around the world indicate many students
struggle with these same aspects of online reading comprehension such as generating
questions (e.g., McKenzie, 2005; ROTHSTEIN, SANTANA, 2011); using search engines
and navigating web pages (e.g., Henry, 2006; LEU et al, 2005; WALRAVEN et al, 2009),
critically evaluating (e.g., BARZILAI, ZOHAR, 2012; COIRO; COSCARELLI, 2013;
FABOS, 2008; FLANAGIN & METZGER, 2008; MILLER & BARTLETT, 2012) and
synthesizing information from multiple sources (e.g., KILLI, 2012; ROUET, 2006). Typical
questions that student struggle with in each phase of online reading are illustrated in
Figure 3.

Figure 3: Typical questions students have at each phase of online reading.
35

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Ano: 2014 – Volume: 7 – Número: 2

Just to give you a few more details about what online readers find challenging,
consider findings from a recent analysis of student responses on four evaluation items
included on the Online Reading Comprehension Assessment (ORCA) (COIRO,
COSCARELLI, 2013). Open-constructed responses from two sets of four critical evaluation
items (a subset of 16 items designed to measure online reading comprehension
performance) were compiled from diverse seventh-graders in a representative, two-state,
stratified random sample. The sample was stratified by variables including socioeconomic
status, performance on state reading comprehension assessments, and seventh grade
enrollment size.
These findings show that 18% of 1, 730 students in our diverse sample had difficulty
even determining the author of a website. Further, almost 80% of students in our seventh
grade sample struggled with each of the other three critical evaluation items, which
involved 1) evaluating an author’s level of expertise, 2) identifying the author’s point of
view and one piece evidence that illustrated that point of view, and 3) determining the
overall reliability of a website with reasoned evidence to support their decision. (For more
details about this study and recommended instructional practices to address these
challenges, see <http://goo.gl/mgxTGt>).

5.2

Challenge 2. Developing digital wisdom

Other research highlights a second set of learning challenges for students growing
up in a digital world. In 2001, Mark Prensky, a popular educational scholar and writer,
argued that today’s children are more savvy about using technology than adults, because
they have grown up in a digital world with technology all around them. He described the
younger generation as more savvy “digital natives” and suggested that adults were less
savvy “digital immigrants,” who were born before most digital technology and trying to
figure out how it all works later in life (PRENSKY, 2001).
However, others (see BENNETT, MATON, KERVIN, 2008) debated this idea. These
researchers argued that younger learners were indeed more savvy with using digital
devices outside of school, but most students greatly overestimated their ability to use
digital technologies for academic learning purposes. Since then, Mark Prensky has
changed his thinking about digital natives. He has written several books that argue
learners of all ages have good ideas to share, but we all need to develop a better digital
wisdom that can smartly use technology in many new situations. Among other things,
Prensky (2012) argues the need to focus our instruction on teaching students how to
“learn how to learn” with digital technologies in ways that also make good use of human
brainpower.

5.3

Challenge 3. Meeting the demands of a digital participatory culture

Henry Jenkins, a media literacy scholar, describes a third set of challenges in his
2008 white paper titled, “Confronting the Challenges of Participatory Culture: Media
Education for the 21st century.” Jenkins (2008) argues that today’s students can no longer
see themselves as passive readers of information. As shown in the slide, students are now
36

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Ano: 2014 – Volume: 7 – Número: 2

expected to use their digital skills for increasingly public roles as media makers, social
activists, and contributors to a new knowledge base for their community.
Students are expected to use new technologies to solve problems by working
collaboratively, ethically, and in ways that incorporate multiple perspectives. That’s a lot of
pressure, especially for learners who have limited access to technology outside of school
and for those who do not have the support of good teachers to help them learn these
digital cultural practices. Jenkins argues that educational policies and teaching practices
need to change to better confront the challenges of a digital participatory culture.

5.4

Challenge 4. Adjusting to new teaching roles

Finally, before we get to the amazing power of the Internet, a fourth set of
challenges for both students and educators involves adjusting to new teacher roles. The
most effective teachers of digital literacies work and learn side-by-side with students and
they honor the knowledge and experiences students bring from home (COIRO, 2009). In
addition, teachers weave in ways of building positive attitudes toward using the Internet for
school-related research. This means making time to determine if learners find the Internet
valuable and engaging or useless and frustrating. This also means making time to teach
students how their positive (or negative) feelings toward the Internet can actually impact
their ability to comprehend information on the Internet.
Research suggests that students who are easily frustrated when they can’t find
something on the Internet and those who tend to respond with feelings of anger and
helplessness do considerably worse when it comes to locating, evaluating, and
synthesizing information on the Internet (COIRO, 2012). As educators, we need to think
about ways we can support these students and teach them more positive feelings about
using the Internet to answer their own questions and solve their own information problems.

6 What opportunities do “digitally literate” learners encounter when they interact
with people and information online?
Now, I hope I haven’t frustrated you with so many challenges and left you
wondering why we would ever want to focus our teaching on online reading
comprehension! The reason is simple – if we support students in becoming stronger
online readers, the Internet is the perfect place to provide them with many exciting
opportunities! In the rest of this paper, I will share some ways that skilled online readers
can use digital text and tools to think more deeply about topics that interest them, develop
a strong personal voice, and work collaboratively in ways that enable them to make a real
difference in their communities and perhaps even the world. (To explore these resources
on your own, visit <http://coiroevidosol.wikispaces.com/>).

6.1

Opportunities to wonder and think deeply
Mystery photos. Let’s begin with ways that the Internet can encourage even the
37

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Ano: 2014 – Volume: 7 – Número: 2

youngest learners to question, wonder, and think more deeply about things. One activity I
often use with students is something called Mystery Photos, like the one shown in the left
side of Figure 4. To play the game, ask students to look at the photo and think about what
the image might be. Then, think about what evidence in the picture makes them think that.
After students have time to talk about their educated guesses, they can visit a website like
Jigzone, where they can put together a puzzle of this mystery photo and discover the
answer to “What is this?” all by themselves. When they finish the interactive puzzle, they
learn that the image is the top part of a crowned crane (see the right side of Figure 4 and
the completed puzzle at <http://www.jigzone.com/puzzles/C3055D567D1B>).
Mystery Photo

Full Image of Photo Revealed

Source:

<http://www.sdzsafaripark.org/parkwildlife/cr
owned_crane.html>.
Figure 4: Partial and full images of a crowned crane used in Mystery Photo Activity.

After seeing the real picture of a crowned crane, children can meet in small groups
to develop some interesting questions they would like to learn more about this animal.
Then, they are given time to explore a video and read information about the crowned
crane from an age-appropriate San Diego Zoo website called Safari Park
(<http://www.sdzsafaripark.org/parkwildlife/crowned_crane.html>). All of a sudden, without
realizing all the literacy skills they are practicing, students become intrigued by this
mystery object and want to read, watch, talk, and share what they’ve learned with their
classmates – which in turns, fosters deeper learning.
Internet inquiry baskets. Once students realize the power of interesting questions,
you can continue building a culture of inquiry and wondering with an activity called Internet
Inquiry Baskets. Here, children write down all of their questions, one on each card, and
put the cards into the basket. At the end of the week (or lesson), the teacher selects a
card/question, does some individual research to find information about this question, and
comes back to school ready to share with children the steps they took to answer the
question.
The point of this activity is not just to send the children to the answers; it’s more
about teachers modeling and thinking aloud about the strategies they use to use search
engines, navigate through websites, and decide which information is most relevant and
appropriate for their needs. These websites can be set up in reading and writing centers
for children to visit throughout the day. After the teacher models a lesson for the whole
class, the child who asked the original question spends time meeting with an adult or peer
helper to type up what she learned. The child adds her photo, and her page is published
38

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Ano: 2014 – Volume: 7 – Número: 2

and shared with her classmates, with teachers in the school, or parents at home, or even
the local public library.
Figure 5 shows the digital product that four-year-old Justine created, which was
published in the class Internet Inquiry Basket journal. At even this young age, children can
start to practice important online reading skills like questioning, locating, evaluating, and
composing digital texts while participating in their literacy community.

Figure 5: Page from the class journal after Internet Inquiry Basket Activity.

Creating digital teaching products. As children get older, the digital products they
create can be used to actually teach their friends new things they are learning about in
school! For example, take a minute to listen to the homepage video at Club Academia,
<http://clubacademia.org>, a website created by students, for students. In the video, an
eighth grader teaches her friends about how to graph points on a number line by
comparing each point to positions closer to or further away from a boy she might like. Not
only is the student who made the video thinking more deeply about math concepts, she’s
also building her own personal voice as a teacher (or creative sharer of knowledge)! As
you watch the video, consider the important digital literacy skills this student is practicing
as she creates and shares this video.
Older students can practice wondering, locating, and synthesizing answers with a
2FerActivity (<http://2ferquarterly.org/page/2/>). In this activity, students do online research
and write a two page analytical essay on a topic of their choice.

6.2

Opportunities to develop personal voice

There are also many opportunities for learners to develop their personal voice while
developing online inquiry skills. Just a few I shared during my presentation include creating
instructional videos and podcasts of how to comment appropriately on a blog (see
<http://goo.gl/09kFjZ>); creating podcasts to practice decoding and fluency skills (see
39

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Ano: 2014 – Volume: 7 – Número: 2

<http://hbishop.podbean.com/category/readers-theater/>); or, interviewing community
members about current news events and publishing their interviews in weekly digital
podcasts (see Radio Williow Web at <http://mps.mpsomaha.org/willow/radio/shows/
Willowcast38.html>).
The
Children’s
Encyclopedia
of
Women
(<http://www2.lhric.org/pocantico/womenenc/womenenc.htm>) is a perfect example of how
the Internet gives young digital savvy students opportunities to share their new ideas about
important women in history while developing a public voice and a new information space
on the Internet.
Students can continue to personalize their public voice in forums like Spaghetti
Book Club (<http://www.spaghettibookclub.org/>), where they write and publish their own
book reviews, or Teen Ink (<www.teenink.com/>), where they write, share and critique their
own poems, short stories, and other genres of writing.

6.3

Opportunities to collaboratively build new knowledge

A third important opportunity the Internet provides is time for students to practice
questioning, locating, evaluating, and synthesizing information collaboratively with a
partner or in a small group. In this short video of elementary students working together
during
their
online
inquiry
about
ecologically
friendly
toys
(see
<http://coiroira2013.wikispaces.com/EvanandWilliam>), you can see how they build
cognitive reading strategies as well as productive social practices for collaborating with a
partner while learning something new. (For more information about this project, visit
<http://coiroira2013.wikispaces.com/>). You can also explore a class collaborative project
where students and scientists work together to create projects about animal adaptations
with a digital tool called VoiceThread (see <https://sites.google.com/a/scc.stanly.edu/
voicethread-project/>). Scientists, teachers, and students use the VoiceThread tool to
interview each other, publish their findings, and share their new knowledge about animals
with the global community.
Even in poor rural communities, the Internet provides so many opportunities to
learn, share, and build community knowledge. Be sure to later explore the short video to
see for yourself how the Internet has changed a community in India as part of Sugata
Mitra’s Hole in the Wall Project (<http://goo.gl/pzXrTv>).

6.4

Opportunities to make a difference

Finally, the last, and probably most important opportunity the Internet provides is a
chance for both younger and older students to matter in ways that make a small or big
difference in their world. Take, for example, my colleague Renee Hobb’s work on her
Powerful Voices project (<http://powerfulvoicesforkids.com/>). Here, young children work
collaboratively to employ the Internet, digital tools, and their own human compassion to
investigate topics they find important. In one project, you can view a digital cartoon book
published by a group of young children as a culminating project after walking by a
homeless person sleeping on a park bench.
The group wanted to know how they could help, so the teacher engaged the
40

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Ano: 2014 – Volume: 7 – Número: 2

children in a week-long inquiry process back in their classroom. The teacher conducted
lessons in online research, interviewing skills, and digital composition and students worked
collaboratively to publish a multi-page story about ways that people could help meet the
needs of homeless people in their community. These young learners really felt empowered
by their civic engagement and digital literacy skills!
As children get older, collaborative online projects like Global Schoolnet’s Doors to
Diplomacy (<http://www.globalschoolnet.org/gsndoors/>) encourage middle and high
school students to conduct research and produce web-based products that teach about
the importance of international affairs and diplomacy. Another popular way for students to
have their voice heard digitally in ways that matter involves creating short, video-based
public service announcements like those you might find at <http://studentpsa.com/psa/>.
All of these experiences help students build the confidence, skills, and experiences
they need to be active, digitally savvy global citizens. As the Annual Google Science Fair
competition suggests, our job is to prepare students to be curious and caring, read
competently in offline and online spaces, and create innovative products that can truly
change the world (see <https://www.googlesciencefair.com/en/>).
So, now we have come full circle. First, you learned about four of the biggest
challenges for today’s learners and online readers. Then, you learned about the exciting
things that students can do once they are digitally competent. There are so many more
things to learn about online reading comprehension and I invite you to join me in the
journey and to share what you learn with the larger online community. Thank you for the
opportunity to share my research with you.

References
BARZILAI, S., & ZOHAR, A. Epistemic thinking in action: Evaluating and integrating online
sources. Cognition and Instruction, 30 (1), 2012, p. 39–85.
BENNETT, S.; MATON, K.; KERVIN, L. The digital natives debate: A critical review of the
evidence. British Journal of Educational Technology, 39 (5), 2008, p. 775-786.
COIRO, J. Exploring changes to reading comprehension on the Internet. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Connecticut. Storrs, CT, 2007.
COIRO, J. Promising practices for supporting adolescents’ online literacy development. In:
WOOD, K. D.; BLANTON, W. E. (Eds.). Literacy instruction for adolescents: Researchbased practice. New York, NY: Guilford Press, 2009, p. 442-471.
COIRo, J. Predicting reading comprehension on the Internet: Contributions of offline
reading skills, online reading skills, and prior knowledge. Journal of Literacy Research,
43(4), 2011, p. 352-392.
COIRO, J. Digital Literacies: Understanding dispositions toward reading on the Internet.
Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy, April, 55(7), 2012, p. 645-648.
COIRO, J.; COSCARELLI, C. Investigating criteria seventh-graders use to evaluate the
41

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Ano: 2014 – Volume: 7 – Número: 2

quality of online information. Symposium presented at the 63 rd annual meeting of the
Literacy Research Association, Dallas, TX, December, 2013.
FABOS, B. The price of information: Critical literacy education and today’s Internet. In:
COIRO, J.; KNOBEL, M.; LANKSHEAR, C.; LEU, D. (Eds.). Handbook of research on new
literacies. New York: Lawrence Erlbaum, 2008, p. 839-870.
FLANAGIN, A.J.; METZGER, M. Digital Media and Youth: Unparalleled Opportunity and
Unprecedented Responsibility. In: METZGER, M.J.; FLANAGIN, A. J. (Eds.) Digital Media,
Youth, and Credibility: The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Series on
Digital Media and Learning. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2008, p. 5–28.
HARTMAN, D. K.; MORSINK, P. M.; ZHENG, J. From print to pixels: The evolution of
cognitive conceptions of reading comprehension. In: BAKER, E. A. (Ed.). The new
literacies: Multiple perspectives on research and practice. New York, NY: Guilford Press,
2010, p. 131-164.
HENRY, L. A. SEARCHing for an Answer: The Critical Role of New Literacies While
Reading on the Internet. The Reading Teacher, 59(7), 2006, 614–627.
JENKINS, H. Confronting the challenges of participatory culture: Media Education for the
21st Century. McArthur Foundation, 2008.
LEU, D. J, CASTEK, J., HARTMAN, D., COIRO, J., HENRY, L., KULIKOWICH, J., LYVER,
S. (2005). Evaluating the development of scientific knowledge and new forms of reading
comprehension during online learning. Final report presented to the North Central
Regional Educational Laboratory/Learning Point Associates. Available online at
<http://www.newliteracies.uconn.edu/ncrel.html>.
LEU, D. J. JR.; KINZER, C. K.; COIRO, J.; CASTEK, J.; HENRY, L. A. New literacies: A
dual-level theory of the changing nature of literacy, instruction, and assessment. In:
RUDDELL, R. B.; ALVERMANN, D. (Eds.). Theoretical Models and Processes of Reading,
Sixth Edition, Newark, DE: International Reading Association, 2013.
McKenzie, J. Learning to question to wonder to learn. Bellingham, WA: FNO Press, 2005.
MILLER, C.; BARTLETT, J. 'Digital fluency': Toward young people’s critical use of the
Internet. Journal of Information Literacy, 6(2), 2012, p. 35-55.
PRENSKY, M. Digital natives, digital immigrants. On the Horizon: MCB University Press.
9(5). 2001, p. 1-6.
PRENSKY, M. Brain gain: Technology and the quest for digital wisdom. New York, NY:
Palgrave McMillan, 2012.
ROTHSTEIN D.; SANTANA. L. Make just one change: Teach students to ask their own
questions. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press, 2011.

42

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Ano: 2014 – Volume: 7 – Número: 2

ROUET, J.-F. The skills of document use: From text comprehension to web-based
learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2006.
WALRAVEN, A.; BRAND-GRUWEL, S.; BOSHUIZEN, H. P. How students evaluate
information and sources when searching the World Wide Web for information. Computers
& Education, 52(1), 2009, p. 234–246.

43

