http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

LANGUAGE LEARNING IN BLENDED AND TANDEM WITH BRAZILIAN PARTNERS:
FLEXIBLE LEARNING MODELS
ENSINO DE LÍNGUAS EM BLENDED E TANDEM COM PARCEIROS BRAZILEIROS:
MODELOS DE ENSINO FLEXÍVEIS

Ulisses Tadeu Vaz de Oliveira
Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul
ulisvaz@gmail.com

ABSTRACT: This case study aims at arriving at a thorough understanding of the
complexities at issue for the implementation and development of the in-curriculum
discipline of English in the School of Business and Hospitality in a Brazilian university
targeting internationalization. On top of that, the program has a technological approach,
which is, in other words, the use of technology (specifically ICT) as pivotal to maximize
learning opportunities through a flexible delivery of instructions. The program was primarily
designed by the approach of blended learning, but this case study also describes a merge
with tandem learning in which it was a pilot project. I initially present theories that have
framed this research. Next, I share my experience teaching and coordinating the program,
and then I make some considerations about positive aspects and upcoming challenges
KEYWORDS: Computer-Assisted Language Learning; blended learning; tandem learning;
Systemic-Functional Linguistics; ICT.
RESUMO: O presente estudo de caso tem como objetivo chegar a uma extensa
compreensão das complexidades em questão para a implementação e o desenvolvimento
da disciplina curricular de Inglês na Escola de Negócios e Hospitalidade de uma
universidade brasileira, visando a sua internacionalização. Além disso, o programa tem
uma abordagem tecnológica, ou seja, o uso da tecnologia (especificamente TIC) como
elemento crucial para maximizar oportunidades de aprendizagem através de um modelo
flexível de ensino. O programa foi principalmente desenvolvido com enfoque na
abordagem do blended learning. No entanto, este estudo de caso também descreve uma
mesclagem com o tandem learning num projeto piloto. Inicialmente, são apresentadas as
teorias que enquadram a pesquisa; em seguida, compartilhamos nossa experiência de
ensino e coordenação do programa para, então, fazer algumas considerações sobre
aspectos positivos e desafios futuros.
PALAVRAS-CHAVE: Aprendizagem mediada pelo computador; blended learning; tandem
learning; Linguística Sistêmico-Funcional; TIC.
1 Introduction
Over recent years educators and researchers from a number of countries have
mastered the infusion of Information and Communication Technology (henceforth ICT) into
their classrooms to teach second and foreign languages. There are basically two ways of
123

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

addressing the matter: (1) an ever-increasing but incomplete body of research that
spotlights educational approaches integrated with ICT as a central piece for learning; and
(2) the use of ICTs as tools. The former usually makes students actively immersed in
language learning in multiple ways through activities, procedures and techniques. The
latter hold up ICT perspectives as bridging student-teacher relationship that remains
largely unchanged; perspectives that are reinforced and repeated in school curricula
worldwide.
Assuming technology is an integrative part of our society, ICT can no longer be
seen as a mere add-on in language learning practices. In this line of thought, many
programs have been considering a technological approach to teach English Foreign
Language (hereafter EFL), with the sought-after constructivist approach overlaying
ongoing educational practices these days. For example, Edirippulige et al. (2013) link
technology to the constructivist teaching methods because it enhances and speed up the
students’ phases of self-regulation: Forethought, Volitional Control and Self-reflection. The
first stage, known as Object-regulation, is that learners are often controlled by or by using
objects in their environment in order to think; and technology provides a ton of
manipulative objects for this purpose. The second stage, also termed Other-regulation,
includes implicit and explicit mediation; and technology scaffolds or even role-plays
mediations with parents, siblings, peers, teachers, and so on. The final stage, Selfregulation, specify the ability to accomplish activities with minimal or no external support;
and technology sets the stage for Self-regulation, which is only made possible through
internalization (ZIMMERMAN, 1990).
A number of studies have validated the contribution of ICT to EFL/ESL teaching
(e.g. BRIERLEY, 1991; BOSWOOD, 1997; LEE et al., 2005; BEATTY, 2013). The vast
spectrum of researches weighs the ICT positive effects moving forward, though, with all
the remarkable challenges in view. In this sense, Dudeney & Hockly (2007) highlight the
slow change of teachers’ mindset as an important negative factor; however, they
demonstrate positive aspects that will exert an influence on teaching and what the future of
technologies might hold for ELT in the following years (summarized):
-

High numbers of teachers and students versed in multiple technologies;
Generation of teachers and professionals that have already studied through
distance learning;
Better software, tools and devices alongside to the Web 2.0 boom;
Highly sophisticated technology present in everyday life activities;
Higher levels of technology have made significant inroads in academics to Gen M;
Huge growth of education and training through web-based environments (c.f.
SCHMID et al., 2014).

That said, the overarching goal of this paper is to present a case study of a
technological approach to EFL teaching as an in-curriculum discipline to undergraduate
students in Brazil. The program was primarily designed by the approach of blended
learning, but this case study also offers a merge with tandem learning in which was a pilot
project. The outcomes were examined to determine feasibility, time, cost, adverse events,
124

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

and effect size based on two notions: (1) multifarious methodologies custommized in
programs’ design as a set of correlative assumptions dealing with the nature of the
technology used to language teaching and learning; and (2) broaden perspective of
learning centered in the technological approach. I did not set out to provide readers in
these few short pages with an all-encompassing research-informed study about ICT
applied to language education. I might be circumspect in trying to shed light on additional
language learning circumstances by showing a proven effective way of addressing EFL in
this specific context.
In pursuance of detecting cultural and personality traces of the cohort as distance
learning partners, the theoretical framework of Systemic-Functional Linguistics was
applied to analyze interactions of students who underwent tandem learning.
The following section briefly discusses some technological advances and varied
educational approaches that have influenced and modelled language learning the way it is
practiced today.

2 Technology and English Language Teaching
The modern world speed and the paradigms built around new social habits in an era
of great information exchange and fast-paced technological progress impose the
researcher the gruelling task of recognizing the best approaches and methodologies
based on detailed and accurate studies of studentship and educational goals.
This paper, for example, gets to wind down by its publication, whereas in different
parts of the globe new ICTs and software are being developed and used in varying ways to
teach and learn languages. Yet, the validity of such studies is readily aligned with Leffa’s
thought that “no approach contains all the truth and no one carries out so much that it
cannot evolve. The wise stance is to incorporate the new to the old; the greater or lesser
degree of accommodation will depend on the context in which the teacher is subjected to,
his/her experience and knowledge” (1988, p. 16).
a) English as an International Language
The ad hoc English as a Lingua Franca is quite consolidated. After Kachru circles
(1992), many studies about standards of English have burgeoned. In 2003, McKay
estimated that “by 2025 there would (will from the original) be more speakers of English as
a second language than speakers of English as a first language”. In 2009, Jenkins stated
that the ESL speakers had already outnumbered native speakers (NS). From this
perspective, English flourishes due to massive international businesses and increasing
migration. Notwithstanding the ideal conditions settling English as a Lingua Franca,
significant hurdles turn up from this, with particular reference to the development of
materials and technologies, followed by changes in teaching practices and methodologies
aiming a new reference model based on non-native speaker (NNS) standards
(FERGUSON, PÉREZ-LLANTADA; PLO, 2011).
The above-mentioned studies add up to a growing body of research that has been
settling patterns of teachability, comprehensibility and demands. A good example thereof is
125

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

The Lingua Franca Core proposed by Jennifer Jenkins (2000) – about phonological
features – which tries to redefine and re-classify pronunciation error, and in so doing to
embrace the sociolinguistic facts of regional variation. Jenkins’ proposal recognizes the
rights of NNSs to their own legitimate regional accents rather than regarding deviation
from NS pronunciation norms as ‘error’ (c.f. SPICER-ESCALANTE, 2011). McKay (op. cit.)
follows this rationale by admiting an escalating anglocentric rejection around the sense
that the NS model is no longer the ultimate goal of learning English. The breakdown in
NNS-NNS/NNS-NS talk can be extended to levels of grammar (TALMY, 2012) and
semantics (KECSKES, 2008), and in due time it demands adaptive ICTs to incorporate the
NNS communicative diversity.
b) E-learning enhanced by Language Learning Technologies
E-learning is a term widely used to describe learning that happens using technology
– tablets, iPads, PCs, smartboards, laptops, etc. (DUDENEY; HOCKLY, 2007). E-learning
can be a way to teach anywhere at any time to anybody (Ibid.). Throughout the years a lot
of terms and acronyms were coined to describe variations of E-learning, and their
boundaries can be determined by three main factors:
Interaction
The core distinction here refers to synchronous or asynchronous interactions. Some
authors (e.g. BAPORIKAR, 2013, CLEVELAND-INNES; GARRISON, 2010) argue that,
after a second and third waves of highly sophisticated technologies (p.ext. ICTs) took over
the globe last century, real-time interactions have forced the redefinition of E-learning:
“Electronic learning is not only a kind of virtual or distance education to deliver content by
electronic means [...], but it is aimed at effective learning in real time” (BAPORIKAR, 2013,
p. 22).
Technology
The acronym ICT (Information Communication Technology) has been adopted as
an umbrella term to make reference to technology applied to educational purposes.
However, ICT for language learning has a twofold aspect of tool or environment. To be
specific, for these purposes, we can either wrap up E-learning concepts and subdivisions
as tools, for instance, M-learning (E-learning using mobiles), CALL (Computer Assisted
Language Learning), and CBT (Computer-Based Training); or consider technology under
the notion of environment, for example, VLE (Virtual Learning Environment), LMS
(Learning Management System), WBT (Web-Based Training), and SCORM (Sharable
Content Object Reference Model). Lately, many language programs have been getting on
the bandwagon of Web 2.0 (O’REILLY, 2007), which has become a buzzword in education
to designate a second generation of communities and services, with the concept of the
web as platform.
Methodologies & Approaches
In dealing with this aspect, the basic distinction is regarding autonomous or
mediated learning. The assumption of levels of autonomy is key to determine modalities of
126

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

E-learning: open learning, online learning, blended learning, etc.
When it comes to definitions of methodologies, approaches, principles and
techniques there is sort of a disagreement among scholars and researchers. The
Anthony’s model (ANTHONY, 1963, p. 63-67 apud RICHARDS; RODGERS, 2014, p. 15)
presents techniques carrying out a method, which is consistent with an approach.
Richards and Rodgers (1986) propose a different hierarchy where method is atop and is
put together through approaches, designs and procedures. Larsen-Freeman and Anderson
(2013) define the “techniques” as the methods or actions teachers carry out in the
classroom, and the “principles” as the thoughts (beliefs, attitudes, values, and awareness).
This paper won’t go deep into the details of this discussion. Otherwise, it is as satisfactory
as important to understand that we build effective learning around methodologies,
approaches, principles and techniques combined properly. For example, a teacher can use
mobiles to conduct a webinar, adopting the communicative approach in a context of
tandem learning. Together, these methodologies, approaches, principles and techniques
purposely accomplish educational goals in a critical pedagogical framework.
Likewise, some educational programs try to marry teaching approaches and
methods with technology. A good example is the TELE (Technology Enhanced Learning
Environments), which focuses on a student-centred model of education integrating themes
that are given real-life applicability through technologically supported delivery methods.
TELEs are educational environments in which students are immersed in “learning by
doing” with an emphasis on learning based upon constructivist pedagogy (HANNAFIN;
LAND, 1997).
A discussion now follows about two methodological approaches that are important
to this case study.

3 Blended & Tandem Learning
Blended and tandem learning are two E-learning subdivisions of paramount
importance. Blended learning, or B-learning, makes extensive use of learning technologies
through the “blend” of physical and virtual environments in order to supplement traditional
face-to-face (F2F) learning (BERSIN, 2004). The growing popularity of blended learning
presupposes its success. On the other hand, the transition from traditional F2F to blended
learning is not trivial, with challenges for both students and instructors (GARRISON;
KANUKA, 2004).
According to Bersin (2004), the blended learning model has been used both in basic
and higher education. The common model in most open universities around the world
contains paradoxes (GURI-ROSENBLIT; GROS, 2011), the most central of which is the
gap between teachers/instructors and course designers. Even though issues are
noticeable, as of today, B-learning is considered the most effective model for E-learning
with far-reaching social implications (e.g. DUHANEY, 2004; GRAHAM, 2013).
A wide variety of B-learning models are described in the literature (e.g. THORNE,
2003; BONK; GRAHAM, 2012). Staker and Horn (2012) propose four types of pedagogic
models ranging from a more brick-and-mortar to a more online orientation. These models
are (summarized):
127

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

(1) Rotation model – students rotate on a fixed schedule or at the teacher’s discretion
between learning modalities, at least one of which is online learning.
(2) Flex model – content and instruction are delivered primarily by the Internet. The
teacher provides face-to-face support on a flexible and adaptive as-needed basis.
Some implementations have substantial F2F support though.
(3) Self-Blend model – students choose to take one or more courses entirely online to
supplement their traditional courses.
(4) Enriched-Virtual model – a whole-school experience in which within each course
students divide their time between brick-and-mortar and online delivery of content
and instruction. It differs from the Flex Model because students seldom attend the
brick-and-mortar campus every weekday.
Regarding tandem learning, it happens when native speakers of two different
languages (ideally each learner is a native speaker in the language the proponent wants to
learn) work together in order to learn each other’s language and develop the knowledge of
the target culture and community. In line with Guth and Thomas (2010), tandem learning
has the cultural integration as an indispensable part of the language learning process. As a
result, more than helping one another improving language skills, “the approach is a form of
open learning whereby partners learn more about one another’s character and culture and
exchange additional knowledge – for example, about their professional life”
(BRAMMERTS, 1996, p. 34).
O’Dowd (2007) establishes two basic distinctions for language learning in tandem:
(1) both partners can meet in person (face-to-face tandem); or (2) learn by email, phone,
web-based or other media (E-tandem, also termed Distance Tandem). In addition, there
are different uses of the tandem method that promote independent learning, such as
Tandem Partnerships (two people, supported by counsellors), Binational Tandem Courses
(for groups, organised by moderators), and E-mail Tandem (e-mails exchange).
Why opt for blended learning?
Given the huge canvas of studies about B-learning, many scholars argue it merges
the best of E-learning combined with traditional learning approaches, but for all that, some
rigorous sifting
finds it can
equally
combine
disadvantages of
both
environments/approaches if not well executed (GRAHAM, 2013). More often than not,
language programs seem to take a restrictive approach because students may prefer total
on-campus experience, while others go for fully online learning. Therefore, an important
facet of the blended approach is the adaptability to students’ expectations and learning
styles across the board.
Another important factor to consider is the protagonism. Following a constructivist
approach, B-learning conceives students as the centrepiece of the learning process. They
have the means to control when, where, how and with whom they will study. Of course, the
teacher is still a much-needed presence in the wake of misconceptions for reliable
supervision and teaching.
Why opt for tandem learning?
Among the many advantages of tandem learning, perhaps the most important is the
128

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

development of the intercultural competence from countries the world over. According to
O’Dowd (2007), tandem fosters a change of perspective, with comparison of one’s own
and foreign points of view. This cross-cultural and cross-border understanding suits the
Social Needs level of Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs (1943) perfectly. The margin for new
friendships is associated with the sense of belongingness as a psychological factor to
increase students’ motivation. Baumeister and Leary (1995) posit that belongingness
(p.ext. social acceptance) is a universal desire, and such a fundamental human motivation
that we feel severe consequences of not belonging.
With regard to language aspects, Brammerts (1996) observed that students
subjected to tandem learning got slightly better improvement results in listening
comprehension and speaking skills – arguably the most challenging skills to develop in
F2F classes. According to the author (Ibid.), the mutual mistake correction also helped
students increasing awareness about their own language. Rather than only working
Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP) skills, tandem contributes to the
development of Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS), which corresponds to
the skills developed from social activities and everyday language. The contact with natives
creates ideal conditions to achieve native-like conversational proficiency since it is very
much context-embedded and always used in real-life situations that have real-world
connections (HAKUTA; BUTLER; WITT, 2000).
To sum up this section, the bold advantage of blended and tandem learning models
is the merge of online and F2F educational practices in order to arrange much better
interactional networks at the local, regional and global levels. Students can be protagonists
and team up in joint problem-solving activities, in which both share knowledge and
responsibility for the task (DIAZ; NEAL; AMAYA-WILLIAMS, 1990). These practices may
affect factors such as dropout, employability and interest level. The following case study
(Chapter 3) won’t offer teaching recipes; instead it will offer something akin to ideas,
understandings and educational experiences that might be applicable in a variety of
contexts.

4 An Experience with Blended & Tandem learning
As mentioned before, this case study describes an experience with B-learning from
2012 onwards, in a private Brazilian university located in São Paulo 1. It also examines a
pilot project with tandem learning within one semester (2015-1) at the same university. At
first as a teacher, later as the program coordinator, I taught and coordinated the discipline
of English for the School of Business and Hospitality (Business Administration, Marketing,
International Relations, International Trade, Hospitality, and Tourism majors).
Goals
In this study, it was my utmost intent to evaluate the learners’ perception of the
methodological triplet for EFL learning: face-to-face, blended and tandem learning.
Furthermore, the program effectiveness was a major concern.
1

Due to identity protection, the university will be referred as UA. UDLA will be the reference for the partner
institution in the tandem learning project.
129

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

Through the analysis of assessment and evaluation results, surveys, comments,
and interactions of a UA students’ cohort, it was possible to determine their (a) levels of
interest, rejection and responsibility as autonomous learners and language learning
partners; (b) skills using software applications for English learning; and (c) cultural and
personality traces noticeable from face-to-face and distance interactions in the given
context.
Theoretical Framework: Systemic-Functional Linguistics
With a view to analyze the Brazilian students’ behavior in distance interactions, the
functionalist theory of language named Systemic-Functional Linguistics (hereafter SFL)
was applied. It’s important to say that the SFL theory was able to provide the necessary
tools to measure the levels of motivation of students engaged in different EFL experiences.
Since Halliday’s groundbreaking research in 1994, there has been a lot of work carried out
in the area of FL (e.g. MARTIN, 2000; HALLIDAY, MATHIESSEN, 2004; EGGINS, 2004).
The SFL conceives language to be inseparable from human (socially and culturally
mediated), being a theory centered around the notion of language function and social
context. Over and above, the language is characterized by its multifunctional nature and is
seen as a system where each choice “acquires its meanings against the background of
other choices that could have been made” (EGGINS, 2004, p. 3). According to Halliday
(1994), the language constructs three types of simultaneous meanings, or metafunctions:
Ideational (refers to information), Interpersonal (refers to the interaction between the
interlocutors in communication) and textual (refers to the construction of the text).
Scholars holding SFL perspective suggest that this is the most appropriate body of
research for examining the connection between the linguistic structure and social values
(FOWLER, 1991; FAIRCLOUGH, 1992). Hence, the interactions of UA students involved in
tandem learning were analysed in the light of the theory of Appraisal (MARTIN, 2000) –
associated to SFL. In this paper, I shall briefly outline the tenets of the Appraisal theory,
which was useful to understand how students behaved linguistically in learning
interactions. By contextualizing students’ propositions within the overall framework of
Appraisal, it was expected to build a theoretical basis upon which to guide the evaluation
of semantics as an extension of the Interpersonal metafunction. According to Martin and
White (2003), attitude types define the specifics of appraisal being expressed: affect
(personal emotional state), judgment (social or ethical appraisal of other’s behaviour), and
appreciation (evaluation of phenomena).
Program
The base of students who attended the program had a steady growth – except for
2013-2, when the discipline onset was shifted from the first to the second semester.
School of Business and Hospitality topped 2294 students in 2015-1 2, as depicted in the
Chart 1.

2

UA runs on a semester system, which splits the school year in halves (e.g. 2015-1 and 2015-2).
130

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

Chart 1: Number of Students Enrolled in the Program.

Although all the aforementioned majors set store by the in-curriculum discipline of
English, the peculiarities of each area (e.g. graduate’s demands, job market expectations,
ever-changing syllabi) led to contrasting curricula:
• Business Administration, Marketing, International Relations and Hospitality - 4
semesters;
• Tourism - 2 semesters;
• International Trade – 8 semesters.
The total share of English (discipline) in the curricula was big on the whole. For
example, in majors with four semesters of English – which bear the most part of the
enrolled students – English took 15% (320 hours), or thereabouts, of the total study load
(3000 hours). This proportionality is represented in the Chart 2.

Chart 2: In-curriculum English Discipline in Four Semesters (hours).

Design
The program was scaffolded by four pillars:
1)

2)
3)

EIL (English as International Language) – promote the Lingua Franca teaching
mindset upon planning, teaching and materials. Focus on internationalization
and branding.
ICT (Information Communication Technology) – use tools and technological
approaches underscoring M-learning and LMS.
Flexible Methodologies – apply flexible methodologies in order to meet the
131

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

4)

diversity of The School of Business and Hospitality, since it comprises multiple
dynamic and ever-evolving contextual dimensions. Thus, teaching approaches
aimed to attend different learning styles (e.g. visual, auditory, kinaesthetic, etc.)
and nurture students’ Esteem and Social Needs (c.f. Maslow’s Theory of Human
Motivation, 1943).
More study time – invest on ICT as a mean to afford more study time to students
outside of the classroom.

Flexible Delivery of Instructions
Adopting the bold strategy of meeting the criteria of breadth, the methodological
approaches sought to create an EFL flexible delivery of instructions (mediated and
autonomous) with views to the development of higher-order thinking skills. Figure 1
represents how the adopted methodological approaches were complementary: face-toface classes (mandatory), B-learning (optional/ meritocracy policy), and tandem learning
(pilot project).

Figure 1: Flexible Delivery of Instructions.

Levelling
The levelling (or grouping) for F2F classes progressed in search of accreditation
and quality ratings. The following steps were then taken: (1) as soon as students started
out in the program as sophomores, they took a proficiency test to be placed (c.f. CEFR);
(2) students were then divided into groups – max 30 students; (3) groups were optimized
in pools3 from 2014-1 and so forth. Despite the effort to meet students’ individual needs
through placement tests, the levelling of classes faced a major crux on occasion of the
detection of more levels within a group than the number of groups (classes) offered. The
Chart 3 provides a sample of the students’ entrance levels (proportion) in one of the
university campuses.

3

Pools refer to groups of an average of 30 students in which there may be students of different majors
who share similar levels of knowledge in English language. This division fostered the positive
interrelationship among students, their culture, background and minor field of experience. Therefore, UA
created pools of: (1) Business: Business Management, Marketing and International Relations; and (2)
Hospitality – Hospitality and Tourism. International Trade students didn’t study in pools.
132

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

Chart 3: Entrance Levels Based on the Placement Test – Campus A 2014-2.

In the interest of addressing the needs of students assessed in very high or very low
proficiency standards, as well as borderline students (few in numbers and unfeasible to be
grouped), teachers made use of complementary activities and also challenged students to
strive for. In this regard, the online component was crucial because it could respond to the
exact needs of each student. The Results section will unfold the combination of F2F and
online components and re-examine the issues.
B-Learning
The blended methodology adopted in the program was designed in the flex mode
with substantial F2F support. The online classes accounted for 50% of the course total
hours and took place on the online learning management system CambridgeLMS. This
platform complements the book series Touchstone and View Point (Cambridge University
Press). As the counterpart of F2F learning, teachers demanded online duties on LMS as
they came along the syllabus.
As expected, B-learning allowed students to be actively involved in the process of
meaning and knowledge construction. This internalization process is best known as
appropriation (ALJAAFREH; LANTOLF, 1994), and it happens when an individual does not
simply reproduce the mental activity of another individual, but rather transforms and
changes the process itself, ultimately creating new cognitive abilities where none existed
before (VYGOTSKY, 1981, p. 163). B-learning creates an ideal environment to undertake
learning from the Object-regulation to the Other-regulation. In time, students finally take
control over strategic mental actions and achieve Self-regulation – wherein B-learning
seems to be unrivalled maximizing learning opportunities.
Tandem Learning
As previously mentioned, blended was complemented with tandem learning in
which was a pilot project that took place in 2014-2. The idea came up after a mirror class
project of Hospitality with students from UDLA. In the aftermath, five UA Brazilian students
(B1-B2 levels) were put in contact with three UDLA native speakers of English students in
situations of E-tandem (Portuguese-English). At the occasion, students used mobile apps
to interact synchronically.
Granted that minimal outside interference in tandem learning is coveted, teachers
only provided as-needed guidance and qualified support to students in case of
miscommunication or inquiries into the content. Thus, students trod outside their comfort
circles because they were not being hard-pressed to study (as trendy and usual); they
were free to discuss about anything they wanted at any time. For their participation, they
133

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

got bonus points by sending pieces of interactions they felt comfortable in sharing with –
exemplified in the Figure 2.

Figure 2: E-Tandem: Conversation Screenshot.

Tandems maximized the advantage of being under tutelage of a more competent
peer, when the partner serves the learner such as a vicarious form of consciousness
(surrogate) until such times as the learner is able to master his own action through his own
consciousness and control. According to Bruner (1985, p. 24), “when the peer achieves
conscious control over a new function or conceptual system, it is then that [s]he is able to
use it as a tool. […] the tutor in effect performs the critical function of ‘scaffolding’ the
learning task to make it possible […] to internalize external knowledge and convert it into a
tool for conscious control”. Beyond that, the contact with natives provided contextembedded instruction, which is believed (c.f. GAY, 2000) to work as a culturally responsive
pedagogy: validating, comprehensive, multidimensional, empowering, transformative, and
emancipatory.
Content: ESL and ESP
Blended and tandem learning are methodological approaches to be on a par with
content in regard to language learning. For this reason, we have to allot a central role to
content in the epistemic path of foreign language learning, in which the biggest dilemma
rolled in is the course orientation into academic or vocational training. In other words,
should we focus on language learning with a view to everyday life communication or its
use in the job market? Any school administrator and teacher will readily admit that there is
not an easy answer to the question. Lifelong experience dawned on me that the hybrid
model is probably the best choice.
There is probably a certain level of confusion about the curriculum (p.ext. content)
adopted in most of the universities. In fact, some authors believe that there are several
myths about ESP (English for Specific Purposes). Some people describe ESP as simply
being the teaching of English for any purpose that can be specified. Others, however, are
more precise, describing it as the teaching of English used in academic studies or the
teaching of English for vocational or professional purposes (ANTHONY, 1997). Ramos
(2005, p.116) identifies as a major problem the fact that the “ESP has become
synonymous with reading courses and, on the other hand, all the reading-orientated
courses are viewed as ESP ones”. One more issue developed by Ramos (Ibid.) is that
“you can only teach ESP after the student mastered the ‘basic English’”. The author is
dead set against this reasoning because, once in the real world, the basics for a
134

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

professional may or may not be to another.
Often, teachers are at a loss. Supporting evidence suggests that teachers might
dampen the possibilities of students in professional life by excluding the lower level ones
or by targeting specific skills. Based on these notions, we split up the content at UA: (a)
more ESP in F2F classes, because teachers had the chance to assess language level,
check on students’ interests, prepare up-to-date activities and gather relevant material to
meaningful learning aligned with professional training; (b) more EFL in online classes
(LMS), because students could be respected in their rhythm (up-tempo or slow-paced),
and could carry out the activities as often as they wanted to. Of course, teachers
intervened in F2F classes (synchronously) either over ESP or EFL content. Actually, the
flex blended learning model has the teacher as a difference-maker. He/she is the one in
charge of planning and adjusting in response to ever-changing needs and demands.
Below, Figure 3 illustrates how ESP and EFL contents were ideally balanced according to
levels’ needs.

Figure 3: CLIL: EFL and ESP for levels (CEFR).

Faculty
Although a well-rounded merge of EFL and ESP framed by an eclectic technological
approach was the blueprint of the program, the teacher’s role was not diminished, in the
sense of his/her capability to diagnose, ponder and act towards students’ needs. Wertsch
(1984, p. 13) points out that, rather than simply framing the role of the teacher as
modelling, the teacher initially creates a level of “intersubjectivity”.
As we mulled over the intersubjectivity and progressed through the
interconnectedness of a multilayered program, it has become clear that the path to the
quality education had to include highly qualified teachers with plural academic background,
so they could interact with students beyond the communicative essence of the language.
Consequently, the faculty (in 2015-1) counted with the participation of eight English
teachers with specialization, Master’s or Ph.D. degrees from the fields of Education,
Linguistics, Hospitality, Gastronomy, and Business.
Assessment and evaluation
The online component had a deep impact on the evaluation system. In addition to
the rule-bound (F2F) assessment UA teachers had to perform, the CambridgeLMS offered
the following advantages for online assessment:
(1) Assertiveness;
(3) Reduction of teachers’ activities;
(2) Continuity;
(4) Similarity with job market assessment standards.
135

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

The gradebook software of the platform could be set to assign marks based on
performance. It also could benchmark students in all the four skills: reading, writing,
speaking (with limitations), and listening. Moreover, teachers had blogs, forums, wikis and
voice tools at their disposal.
With respect to the program evaluation, two samples of students who had reached
the second and fourth semesters in the program – halfway and final points – were tested
by the Cambridge Proficiency Exam in 2013-1. English II students took the Test Level-2
(CEFR Level), and English IV students did the Test Level-4 (CEFR Level). Because the
test was not mandatory, a total of 208 students participated: 74 of Level-2 and 134 of
Level-4. Attached to the test, two questionnaires asked students about: socioeconomic
status (SES), opinions (program/teachers/LMS), and self-evaluation upon learning
progress.
Next, I present valuable results to bear out further discussion over the established
goals.

5 Results
About the levels of interest, rejection and responsibility
The students’ satisfaction rate with the program was measured by anonymous
semi-annual surveys carried out by teachers in the classroom. The surveys happened
from 2012-2 to 2014-1 and the results were very promising (Chart 4).

Chart 4: Students’ Satisfaction (Percentage).

The high approval ratings were also due to the straightforward need for English
language into branching out world citizenship. The importance of EFL foremost weighs on
the concept of Lingua Franca, and a few questions in the survey were devoted exclusively
to completing this picture. For example, Table 1 reveals students strongly relying on
English to work (question 12), to communicate globally (question 15), and as personal
achievement (question 18).

136

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

Table 1: Importance of English (survey).

Naturally, a good evaluation of the program is deeply connected to the students’
perception of learning and the effectiveness of learning. Therefore, results should be read
in perspective because they unfold complex connections and the intertwining mesh of
learning and background for UA undergraduate students. The Charts 5 and 6 below will
help to understand this melting pot.

Chart 5: Age of Students (cohort).

Chart 6: Time Spent Studying English By
Students (cohort).

The proficiency test surveys inform that, in terms of age, students are approximated
(nearly 75% in the range from 18 to 22 y.o.), albeit the margin above 26 is worthy of
consideration. On the contrary, the time spent studying English by students is by far
variable (e.g. 25.53% [two-year] concurrently with 18.63% [eight-year] learning
experience). In Test Level-2, nearly 90% of the sample was at level A2 or below. Among
students who took Test Level-4, almost 95% were within CEFR levels A2-B2. From the
results and SES analysis, a few steps have been taken to redesign and improve the
program. For example and prominently, the redefinition of a minimum Exit-level (B1) and
the setup of a Competence-Oriented Teacher Training Program.
About students’ savviness (tech tools)
In general, students proved to be tech savvy. They could use smartphones and go
through web-based activities without a hitch. Following the Web 2.0 trend, there is an
evident emphasis on online environments to study using user-generated content, usability,
and interoperability. Though, students largely criticized the platform CambridgeLMS.
Wording is based upon that LMS is time-consuming, out-of-context and disconnected from
137

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

Social Media. Further research has to be done to underlie such results.
About cultural and personality traces of Brazilian students (cohort) as learning
partners
The interactions of students involved in the tandem project were analyzed in the
scope of the Systemic-Functional Linguistics. Again, this paper does not have the
necessary depth for that readership. Yet, there are two interesting outcomes from the
appraisal analysis I would like to share:
1 – Peers were friendly and supportive. Both groups used a lot of positive
appraisals in conversations for general descriptions (life, people, places). On the contrary,
they used a high number of negative appraisals to describe themselves. We may find
students swaying between these two extremes simply because they are displaying the
characteristics of cultural adjustment along with error-prone and self-deprecating behavior
at the earlier stages of learning. The following transcript is a perfect example of positive
and negative appraisals (underlined) operating in the best interest of interpersonal
communication.
M: He was very cute/ he was painfully cute. He was great. But I don’t have a
dog anymore, but I have…I walk my neighbors’ dog. (AUDIO)
L: Oh right. I have Pipoca, it’s a Shin Tzu...I don’t know if it’s wrote like this.
M: U mean "written". (SMILES)
L: OMG I feel ashamed making mistakes (SAD FACE EMOTICON)
M: C’mon. You’re doing great. (SMILES)
2 – Engagement is another important aspect that frames cultural and personality
traces. Analysis made evident that foreign students (native) turned out to get the upper
hand in the turn-taking dispute. Brazilians seemed daunted by the Lingua Franca
dominance.
Complementing the appraisal analysis, a summary of students’ comments affords a
glimpse on the benefits of tandem learning. The advantages outweigh the disadvantages:
- Tandem is good in theory, but complicated in practice because it is necessary a
certain affinity level among partners. Countless arrays of the unspoken rules governing
relationships may not be suitable in some tandems.
- Tandem has influenced students’ attitudes towards the foreign language and the
peer culture.
- Both groups expressed eagerness to explore more web-based language-learning
activities on their own.
- Foreigners reported pleased with Brazilians’ politeness and consideration.
Issues & Challenges
This case study presented a successful EFL program, which is reflected on
promising results from Cambridge Proficiency Test and the students’ appreciation for the
program. More importantly, results draw connections to the effectiveness of the
methodologies adopted. It is my intent, otherwise, to raise reader’s awareness about some
138

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

issues that we had to overcome, as well as challenges on the horizon. Next, I pinpoint a
few problems and thought–out primary solutions.
- Insufficient groups: there were times when students were placed wrongly because
of the insufficient number of groups (i.e. levels). Even with the pools, there were
three levels (CEFR) at maximum for each group. Upon facing this situation,
teachers tried to provide extra activities to students, which turned out to be
insufficient. UA headquarters outlined restructuring actions down the road, such as
larger pools and syllabus flexibility. I tend to think that long-term measures are
more effective if combined with short-term ones. A large-scale tandem project could
immediately impact on students’ improvement, specifically of the borderline and
advanced ones. It’s known that language skills are not overtly taught in tandem
learning, but nevertheless inherently known by native English speakers.
- Paucity of ESP material: despite the good reviews of the course, many students
found fault with teachers focusing on English Language Skills rather than English
for Specific Purposes. In fact, for the most part, participants failed thinking the plan
through (section “Content: ESL and ESP” deals with the matter, wherein the
ESP/EFL balancing is detailed). Class observations determined that the teachers
were on the ropes developing ESP activities; and the flaws were many: (1) readymade material is usually too broad and rejected by students who claim for
specifics; (2) ready-made ESP material for A1-B1 students is rare, since some
authors believe they’re not level-appropriate; (3) context-embedded material ought
to be updated monthly, weekly, even daily at the university level; and (4) four to
eight semesters of English discipline and different teachers led to repeated
activities/texts regularly. At the time, teachers found the short-term solution of
creating shared folders in clouds for an ESP database divided into levels (A1 to C2)
and majors. Subsequently, there was little or no chance of replicated activities and
we could diversify styles. Rather, feeding the database proved to be a slow,
randomly and time-consuming process.
- Participation in the LMS: Not all the students were enrolled on the CambridgeLMS
platform, which was a troublesome problem for the B-learning favorable outcome
(Chart 7).

Chart 7: Average of Students Who Accessed the Cambridge Platform (%).

Participation on the plataform was not but indispensable. The very real
consequence of this situation (about 60% of participation) is that it put in jeopardy the
effectiveness of the blended approach. After adopted, UA made LMS duties not
139

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

mandatory. Early on, a bonus policy, albeit very helpful and attractive, did not reach out the
students. Then, UA directors started studying a way to make the participation mandatory.
Although I reckon on the importance of LMS, the amount of previous research can’t prove
we should constrain students rather than motivate them. Personally, I still stand for
meritocracy policies because there’s an underlying meaning not readily noticeable that
mandatory commitment may affect the willingness and enthusiasm of students, which is
ultimately crucial to learn whichever additional language.

6 Concluding Remarks
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) seems to be on the threshold of
major changes in distance education. At the very beginning, ICT was essentially used to
retool long-standing educational processes – late 70s to early 80s – then, on a world-scale
shift, it has underpinned and reshaped several educational approaches by enhancing
distance learning models that include blended and tandem methodological approaches.
While blended combines F2F and distance education (mostly web-based), tandem focuses
on partnerships for language learning, particularly in synchronous interactions. Both
methods evolve hand in hand with steady technological advances. The benefits of such
models propel individualized and diverse needs of students who thrive in multimodal and
multicultural educational routines.
Within a technological framework of language learning, the more you offer ways of
learning, the better you achieve the success that is by custom expected to students. In this
sense, mental activity is unique and, however much a tech-friendly online-adaptive
generation rises up, it’s wise to admit that dispossessing students from the human element
is not a way to revolutionize or modernize education. A flexible delivery of instructions
optimizes language education because (c.f. BRUNER, 1985, p. 32) “there is no way, none,
in which the human being could possibly master that world without the aid and assistance
of others for in fact that world is others”.
This case study attempted to unpack the nexus of an EFL program (to
undergraduate Brazilian students) of a technological approach that primed for
synchronous and asynchronous interactions in mediated and autonomous learning
contexts. In order to bring off successful results, face-to-face classes + blended learning +
tandem Learning were woven together into a strong and effective foreign language
program. The following outcomes are noteworthy:
- Students had maximized opportunities for EFL learning (in hours).
- Students got promising proficiency results.
- Application of social media and mobiles for language learning may be not the ideal
for EFL. However, it proved to be extremely successful in tandem learning for synchronous
interactions. Some students felt uncomfortable with the language management system
adopted.
- In tandem learning, students felt empowered to “teach” their own language. It
shifts away from an error-centered education and instead emphasizes communication for
the learning process.
- Students subjected to blended + tandem methodologies wound up becoming more
140

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

participative in F2F classes.
In conclusion, this case study showed how effective can be the combination of
blended and tandem learning models in order to merge ESP and EFL, BICS and CALP,
mediated and autonomous learning, and synchronous and asynchronous interaction. More
than that, the prerogative to respect diversity is the key to a strong EFL program,
particularly for higher education.

References
ALJAAFREH, A.; Lantolf, J. P. Negative feedback as regulation and second language
learning in the zone of proximal development. The Modern Language Journal, 78(4), p.
465-483, 1994.
ANTHONY, L. Defining English for specific purposes and the role of the ESP practitioner,
1997. Available in: <http://www.laurenceanthony.net/abstracts/Aizukiyo97.pdf>. Retrieved:
November 2015.
BAPORIKAR, N. 21st Century Higher Education Trends in Sultanate of Oman. Strategic
Role of Tertiary Education and Technologies for Sustainable Competitive Advantage.
Hershey, PA, 2013, p. 140-155.
BAUMEISTER, R. F.; LEARY, M. R. The need to belong: desire for interpersonal
attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological bulletin, University of
Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, 117(3), p. 497, 1995.
BEATTY, K. Teaching & researching: Computer-assisted language learning. Routledge.
New York: Pearson ESL, 2013.
BERSIN, J. The blended learning book: Best practices, proven methodologies, and
lessons learned. New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
BONK, C. J., & GRAHAM, C. R. The handbook of blended learning: Global perspectives,
local designs. New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
BOSWOOD, T. New ways of using computers in language teaching. TESOL Series II –
Innovative Classroom Techniques. Alexandria, VA: TESOL Publications, 1997.
BRAMMERTS, H. Language learning in tandem using the Internet. Telecollaboration in
foreign language learning, Hawaii, Honolulu: Second Language Teaching and Curriculum
Centre, 1996, p. 121-130.
BRIERLEY, W. Computers as a tool in Language Teaching. Ellis Horwood Series on
Computers and Their Applications. New York: Ellis Horwood, 1991.
BRUNER, J. Child's talk: Learning to use language. Child Language Teaching and
141

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

Therapy, London: Sage, 1(1), p. 111-114., 1985.
CLEVELAND-INNES, M. F., & GARRISON, D. R. (Eds.). An Introduction to Distance
Education. Understanding teaching and learning in a new era. New York: Routledge. 2010,
p. 13-26.
DIAZ, R. M., NEAL, C. J., & AMAYA-WILLIAMS, M. The social origins of self-regulation. In:
Vygotsky and education: Instructional implications and applications of sociohistorical
psychology, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1990, p. 127-154,
DUDENEY, G., & Hockly, N. How to Teach English with Technology. China: Longman,
2007.
DUHANEY, D. C. Blended learning in education, training, and development. Performance
Improvement, 43(8), p. 35-38, 2004.
EDIRIPPULIGE, S. et al. Evaluation of E-Learning Practices in Undergraduate Medical
Education: Results of a Survey in Sri Lanka. European Conference on eHealth 2007,
Proceedings of the ECEH 2007, Gesellschaft für Informatik, 2013, p. 217-224.
EGGINS, S. Introduction to systemic functional linguistics. London: A&C Black, 2004.
FAIRCLOUGH, N. Discourse and Social Change. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1992.
FERGUSON, G.; PÉREZ-LLANTADA, C.; PLO, R. English as an international language of
scientific publication: a study of attitudes. World Englishes, 30(1), 41-59, 2011.
FOWLER, R. Language in the news: discourse and ideology in the press. London:
Routledge, 1991.
GARRISON, D. R., & KANUKA, H. Blended learning: Uncovering its transformative
potential in higher education. The internet and higher education, 7(2), 95-105, 2004.
GAY, G. Culturally responsive teaching:
Teachers College Press, 2000.

theory, research, and practice. New York:

GRAHAM, R. Blended Learning Systems: Definition, Current Trends and Future
Directions. California: Academia.edu, 2013.
GURI-ROSENBLIT, S.; GROS, B. E-learning: Confusing terminology, research gaps and
inherent challenges. International Journal of E-Learning & Distance Education, 25(1), s/p.,
2011. Available in: <http://ijede.ca/index.php/jde/article/view/729/1206>. Retrieved:
December 2017.
GUTH, S.; THOMAS, M. Telecollaboration with Web 2.0 tools. Telecollaboration, 2, p. 3968, 2010.

142

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

HAKUTA, K.; BUTLER, Y. G.; WITT, D. How long does it take English learners to attain
proficiency?. Policy Report. 2000–1. Santa Barbara: University of California Linguistic
Minority Research Institute, 2000.
HALLIDAY, M. A. Functional grammar. London: Edward Arnold, 1994.
HALLIDAY, M. A.; MATTHIESSEN, C. M. An Introduction to Functional Grammar. 3
ed.London: Arnold, 2004.
HANNAFIN, M. J.; LAND, S. M. The foundations and assumptions of technologyenhanced student-centered learning environments. Instructional science, 25(3), p. 167202, 1997.
JENKINS, J. The Phonology of English as an International Language. Oxford: University
Press, 2000.
JENKINS, J. English as a lingua franca: Interpretations and attitudes. World Englishes,
28(2), p. 200-207, 2009.
KACHRU, B. B. The other tongue: English across cultures. Illinois: University of Illinois
Press, 1992.
KECSKES, I. Dueling contexts: A dynamic model of meaning. Journal of Pragmatics,
40(3), p. 385-406, 2008.
LARSEN-FREEMAN, D.; ANDERSON, M. Techniques and Principles in Language
Teaching.UK: Oxford University Press, 2013.
LEE, C. F. K. et al. Web-based teaching and English language teaching: A Hong Kong
experience. Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press, 2005.
LEFFA, V. J. Metodologia do ensino de línguas. In: BOHN, H.; ANDRESEN, P. Tópicos em
lingüística aplicada: O ensino de línguas estrangeiras. Florianópolis: Ed. da UFSC, 1988,
p. 211-236.
MARTIN, J. R. Beyond exchange: Appraisal systems in English. Evaluation in text:
Authorial stance and the construction of discourse, Oxford: Oxford University Press, p.
142-175, 2000.
MARTIN, J. R.; WHITE, P. R. The language of evaluation. London: Palgrave Macmillan,
2003.
MASLOW, A. H. A Theory of Human Motivation. Psychological Review. 50(4), 370-96,
1943.
McKAY, S. L. Teaching English as an international language: Rethinking goals and
perspectives. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
143

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n. 2, p.123-144, jul.-dez. 2017 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.10.2.123-144

O’DOWD, R. (Ed.). Online intercultural exchange: An introduction for foreign language
teachers. United Kingdom, Bristol: Multilingual Matters. Vol. 15, 2007.
O’REILLY, T. What is Web 2.0: Design patterns and business models for the next
generation of software. Communications & strategies, (1), 17, 2007.
RAMOS, M. Possibilidades e desafios na organização do currículo integrado. In: Ensino
médio integrado: concepção e contradições. São Paulo: Cortez, 2005, p. 106-127.
RICHARDS, J. C.; RODGERS, T. S. Approaches and Methods in Language Teaching. UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1986.
RICHARDS, J. C.; RODGERS, T. S. Approaches and methods in language teaching. UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2014.
SCHMID, R. F., et al. The effects of technology use in postsecondary education: A metaanalysis of classroom applications. Computers & Education, 72, p. 271-291, 2014.
SPICER-ESCALANTE, M. L. Revising our Curriculum/Empowering Students: Teachers
‘Preparation and Perceptions about Bilingual Writing. Theory and Practice in Language
Studies, UK: Academy Publisher, 1(11), p. 1453-1458, 2011.
STAKER, H.; HORN, M. B. Classifying K-12 Blended Learning. Mountain View, CA:
Innosight Institute. 2012.
TALMY, L. Path to realization: A typology of event conflation. In: Annual Meeting of the
Berkeley Linguistics Society. Vol. 17, 2012.
THORNE, K. Blended learning: how to integrate online & traditional learning. UK, London:
Kogan Page Publishers, 2003.
VYGOTSKY L. S. The genesis of higher mental functions. The concept of activity in Soviet
psychology. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1981, p. 144–188.
WERTSCH, J. W. The zone of proximal development: Some conceptual issues. New
directions for child development. Children's learning in the “zone of proximal
development”. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, n. 23, p. 7-18, 1984.
ZIMMERMAN, B. J. Self-regulated learning and academic achievement: An overview.
Educational psychologist, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 25(1), p. 3-17, 1990.
Recebido em 21 de julho de 2017.
Aprovado em 18 de agosto de 2017.

144

