Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

ANALYSIS FOR FINDING THE EFFECT OF MIND MAPPING TECHNIQUE ON THE
IRANIAN ENGLISH AS FOREIGN LANGUAGE LEARNING’ WRITING SKILLS
ANÁLISE PARA DESCOBRIR O EFEITO DA TÉCNICA DE MAPEAMENTO MENTAL
NAS HABILIDADES DE ESCRITA DA APRENDIZAGEM IRANIANA DE INGLÊS COMO
LÍNGUA ESTRANGEIRA

Bita Naghmeh-Abbaspour
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Malaysia
bitana@usm.my

Vahideh Rastgoo
Islamic Azad University, Iran
msn.sirjan2019@gmail.com

ABSTRACT: Instructors are always interested in creating environments that motivate
students to engage dynamically in their learning process. Mind mapping is one of the
teaching and learning strategies that has emerged in this regard. The aim of this study was
to determine the effect of mind mapping technique on the development of the organization
of writing and learning of intermediate English as Foreign Language (EFL) language
learners in Iran. Accordingly, thirty female intermediate English language learners were
selected from a well-known institute in a small city as the participants of the study. They
were randomly allocated to a control as well as an experimental group each consisting of
15 subjects. The control group was provided with the usual training, while the experimental
group was presented with the intervention twice a week during the summer of 2019.
Pretest and posttest were applied for both groups in this experimental study and the
results were then compared. Based on the research findings application of mind mapping
in teaching writing could improve the learners’ writing organization. However, it didn’t show
any significant effects on their writing style. As the results of the statistical analyses
indicated, an application of mind mapping in writing classes would help the learners to
organize their writings in more effective ways.
KEYWORDS: Mind mapping. Teaching writing. Writing organization. Writing style.
RESUMO: Os educadores sempre se interessaram pelo estabelecimento de ambientes
que motivem e estimulem os alunos a se engajarem em seu processo de aprendizado de
maneira ativa e dinâmica. O mapeamento mental está entre as estratégias de ensino e
aprendizagem surgidas nesse sentido. Este estudo teve como objetivo determinar os
efeitos que a técnica de mapeamento mental tem sobre o desenvolvimento da
organização e estilo de escrita de alunos de Inglês como Língua Estrangeira iranianos
intermediários. Assim, trinta participantes do ensino médio de inglês foram selecionadas
de um instituto conhecido em uma pequena cidade como participantes do estudo. Eles
foram alocados aleatoriamente para um controle, bem como um grupo experimental, cada
um composto por 15 indivíduos. O grupo controle recebeu o treinamento usual, enquanto
o grupo experimental recebeu a intervenção duas vezes por semana durante o verão de
2018. O pré-teste e o pós-teste foram aplicados para ambos os grupos neste estudo
experimental e os resultados foram comparados. Com base nos resultados da pesquisa, a
102

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

aplicação do mapeamento mental no ensino da escrita pode melhorar a organização de
escrita dos alunos. No entanto, não mostrou efeitos significativos no estilo de escrita
deles. Como os resultados das análises estatísticas indicaram, uma aplicação de
mapeamento mental nas aulas de redação ajudaria os alunos a organizar seus escritos de
maneira mais eficaz.
PALAVRAS-CHAVE: Mapeamento mental. Ensino de escrita. Organização da escrita.
Estilo da escrita.
1 Introduction
It is generally recognized that the process of searching effective techniques and
methods of teaching and learning will be successful provided that new techniques are
established, while the old strategies are also rediscovered and empowered. The concept
of employing the non-linear organization of thoughts is a good instance of a wellestablished strategy which can assist both teachers and students in classroom
environment. In this regard, scholars have considered mind mapping as one of the most
significant techniques that can be used in optimization of learning capacities and
understanding of how the elements of complex structures are connected together
(INGEMANN, 2017).
By definition, a mind map is a robust diagrammatic technique, presenting a
complete scope of cortical skills in a single, strong manner. Mind mapping has been
described as a visual, non-linear depiction of concepts and their associations
(BIKTIMIROV and NILSN, 2006). In other words, mind maps support cognitive depth as
one of the major learning strategies recommended by methodologists (BOROVKOVÁ,
2014). Mind maps can be applied in a variety of areas of academic learning by students.
Mind mapping often appears in educational literature as employed in the learning of
science concepts or with students who are learning English as their second (ESL) or
foreign language (EFL); however, it seems to have advantages as an active and
collaborative learning instrument in an extensive range of educational contexts.
Given the significant role of mind mapping in learning which has been investigated
and demonstrated by different scholars of various fields, it could be a useful tool to be
applied in learning English writing skill as well, especially considering the importance of
planning prior to writing. Mind mapping is a strategy that can be applied by the students in
the prewriting phase to plan, organize, associate and connect their ideas. Furthermore,
mind mapping helps students to express their thinking in a recursive way, while it is a
supportive technique in teaching and learning which allows students to develop their
writing process since it is used as a pre-writing strategy (AL-JARF, 2011 as cited in
VITULLI, 2016).
1.1

Statement of the problem

Challenges associated with the writing skills are among the most considerable and
common problems influencing both native English speakers and also numerous students
who are attempting to learn English as a second or foreign language across the globe.
Writing is one of the skills whose command is essential to communicate in written form,
while students usually tend to consider it as the most challenging skill (KHOIRIYAH, 2014).
103

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

Furthermore, Al Kamli (2019, p. 1) asserts that “along with reading and understanding,
writing is an indispensable part of the acquisition of a foreign language.” Knowing the
problems students face in writing and given the benefits mind mapping can bring in both
teaching and learning, this research applies mind mapping as one of the pre-writing
techniques to help language learners in two important aspects of writing skill including
organization of their ideas and the style of their writing.
Mind mapping can play the role of a pre-writing strategy to assist learners in
planning their ideas. Learners can use mind mapping strategy to develop any writing topic
and it can be used with all types of paragraphs like narrative, descriptive, argumentative,
expository etc. That is to say, this prewriting technique can deal with all types of
paragraphs and can help learners explore topics in each type of writing (ABD KARIM et al.
2016 referred to RISWANTO; PUTRA, 2012). Mind maps are also beneficial for activating
students’ background knowledge about the topic. Harmer (2001 cited in KHUDHAIR, 2016,
p. 430) stated that “using effective mind maps as classroom strategy can assist students to
activate their prior knowledge and skills to apply to the writing task, and find out what
information they already have and what they still need”. Thus, the use of mind mapping as
a prewriting strategy in EFL classroom is valuable because it motivates learners’ thinking
and creativity. When trying to collect new information, learners reveal the use of their
background knowledge and link it with the new knowledge. Hence, by the use of mind
maps, learners can write down their ideas logically in a visual scheme and develop their
writing topic into a paragraph until to reach a desired number of ideas.
1.2

Objectives of the study

Consequently, the objective of this research is to investigate the effect of mind
mapping on the development of intermediate Iranian EFL learners’ writing skills in the
following areas:
 Organizing the idea in chronological order
 Style of writings.
1.3

Research questions

According to the objectives of the study mentioned above, the following questions
were raised:
Q1. Does mind mapping indicate a significant impact on the development of Iranian
intermediate EFL learners’ writing organization?
Q2. Does mind mapping indicate a significant impact on the development of Iranian
intermediate EFL learners’ writing style?
1.3.1 Research hypotheses
The following hypotheses were raised in the present research given the research
objectives and questions:
H1. Mind mapping does not indicate a significant impact on the development of
104

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

intermediate Iranian EFL learners’ writing organization.
H2. Mind mapping does not indicate a significant impact on the development of
intermediate Iranian EFL learners’ writing style.

2 Literature review
Buzan (1976), the British psychologist, states that traditional methods postulate that
the reader should scan the information from left to right and from the top to bottom, while
the brain would rather scan the complete page in a non-linear manner. He also speculated
extensively about the cerebral hemispheres in order to advocate the exclusive application
of mind mapping over other methods of note-making. This concept is the basic principle of
mind mapping. A Mind map is an illustrative, networked method for storage, organization,
and prioritization of information, which is often done on paper, with the use of key words
and pictures, each of which will ‘snap on’ special memories and stimulate new thoughts
and concepts. Each memory trigger in a Mind Map is a key to discovery of facts, ideas,
and knowledge and, also, to realization of the real capabilities of humans’ extraordinary
minds (BUZAN, 2006; cited in NOURI MOHAMMED, 2013).
All mind maps have several features in common. First of all, all of them have an
idea or a central concept which is focused as a central image. The next common feature of
mind maps is that their main theme radiates outwards from the central depiction as
branches. Each branch consists of a key picture, key word, or special value built into the
associative line. This line can be spatially organized like one point of a city land mark to
another point in the city. Topics of less importance can be represented as sub-branches.
Each branch contains and connects a modal structure connected to the whole structure
(BURNS, 2014).
In general, a simple template of mind map with the above characteristics can be
indicated as follows:

Figure 1: Overall representation of mind maps.
Source: from the authors.

In recent years, scholars have started focusing on this technique in order to
investigate its effects and applications in teaching different areas of knowledge including
languages. Accordingly, the application of mind mapping has been examined from different
dimensions such as its effectiveness in learning vocabulary, improving writing skills, and
105

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

enhancing reading comprehension.

2.1

Empirical studies in a global context

Several studies have been performed in the global context regarding mind mapping
and its association with learning different skills in the language learning process. This
concept doesn’t seem very old and most of the studies have been conducted during 21st
century in some countries including UAE, Turkey, Scotland, etc. In the following
paragraphs some of the studies which have focused on mind mapping and writing skills,
particularly organization and style, are mentioned chronologically.
Al Naghbi (2008) in a study with the topic of application of mind mapping to improve
writing skills in UAE schools investigated the female grade 11 EFL learners at the ages of
16 to 17 years in order to help students in grade 11 proceed from a product-based strategy
toward a process-concentrated technique of writing and also to investigate the application
of mind mapping in these conditions as a pre-writing brainstorming technique in the EFL
context. The primary results indicated the application of mind mapping was accompanied
by a considerable improvement in the students’ writing and helped them to be more
dynamic and also begin to learn different skills such as raising questions in order to grasp
the assigned writing topics. They also learned to produce their own ideas for different
writing tasks.
Karimatul Fajri (2011) investigated the improvement of the students’ writing skill by
applying mind maps on a group of tenth-grade students. The research aimed at finding out
if mind mapping could help the students to promote their skill in writing personal
restatement of text comprising the skill in organization of the idea in time arrangement,
development of ideas, employing accurate grammar, particularly application of past tense,
using accurate mechanism consisting of spelling, punctuation, as well as capitalization,
and finally application of suitable and desirable arrangement of words along with
expressions to strengthen the writing. The results of the study indicated that the students’
writing skill developed after application of mind maps in teaching writing. The writer
concluded that mind maps could affect teach writing.
Another study which was performed by Saed and Al-Omari (2014) on the influence
of a program recommended according to a mind mapping technique in development of
writing attainment of eleventh grade EFL students in Jordan including 91 female students
in the first semester of the academic year of 2013/2014 at Sands National Academy,
Amman Second Directorate of Education. The results indicated that students employing
mind mapping to arrange and provide a summary of information in their writing draft could
generate more rearrangements of ideas in their texts compared to the students who did
not apply this technique. Mind mapping provided the learners with the chance to unify their
ideas before writing. The students’ potential to convey the meaning to write summaries
developed remarkably and they could provide more comprehensive as well as wellorganized writings.
Erdiana (2016) investigated improvement of students’ writing skill by means of mind
mapping and tried to examine if application of mind mapping could promote the students’
writing abilities at Secretary Class of LP3I College, Banda Aceh. Writing skill employed in
this study was focused on how students were able to generate and organize idea and write
106

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

well two types of business letters (making an inquiry and replying to inquiry letter). The
findings proved that the application of mind mapping in writing business letters was
effective since the students’ results of writing from cycle one had improved in cycle two
and the students’ understanding of the writing concept got improved as well. The results
from students’ writing tests showed that 78% of students (above the determined criteria of
success) improved their writing ability.
Aljaser (2017) in a study on the efficiency of electronic Mind Maps in development
of academic achievement and the attitudes regarding learning English in primary school
students aimed at identifying the impacts of applying electronic Mind Maps on the
academic success of the fifth-grade primary female students in the English language
curriculum in comparison with the traditional teaching procedures provided in the teacher’s
guide. Furthermore, the perspectives of the fifth-grade female students regarding the
application of electronic Mind Maps in figuring out the study unit were also examined in
this study. The study employed the quasi-experimental procedure which was applied to
two groups: experimental and control. The study concluded that significant statistical
differences could be found between the mean scores of the experimental group and the
control one in the post achievement test scale which favored the experimental group. The
effect size of the use of Mind Maps was high. Significant statistical differences could be
found between the mean scores of the experimental and control group scores in the post
achievement test regarding the students’ perspectives on learning English in favor of the
experimental group.
Al Kamli (2019) investigated “The Effect of Using Mind Maps to Enhance EFL
Learners' Writing Achievement and Students' Attitudes towards Writing at Taif University”,
proposing the use of mind mapping strategy not only to organize ideas, but also to
organize grammatical and linguistic knowledge. This study has examined the impacts of
employing this mind mapping technique as a pre-writing procedure to improve female
language learners’ writing achievement as well as their perspectives considering writing in
English at Taif University, Saudi Arabia. In a quasi-experimental design, a mixed methods
approach was used through collection of quantitative as well as qualitative data. The study
population included 128 students in an experimental and a control group. According to the
finding of this study, first of all, differences were found between the mean scores of the
experimental and the control groups on the post-tests of the students` writing achievement
and writing attitudes, which favored the experimental group; second, a significant
difference was reported between the mean scores of the experimental group’s pre- and
post-tests in writing achievement and writing attitudes, in favor of the post-test; third,
students’ problems in writing in English consisted of the lack of vocabulary, organization,
spelling as well as grammar; fourth, students were accustomed to memorization, practice,
and self-correction, which indicated that they were not used to planning their writing;
finally, students also showed positive perceptions regarding mind mapping strategy and
believed it was helpful for them to improve their writings in English.
Lanseur and Haddouche (2019) studied the “Enhancing EFL Students’ Writing Skill
through Mind Mapping Strategy” in which they have asserted that most students consider
writing as a hard task because they face difficulties in getting started and in organizing
their ideas. The research sought to examine the association of mind mapping with the
students’ writing skill. This study aimed at examining the effects of mind mapping as a prewriting strategy on enhancement of the EFL students’ writing skill. Toward this objective, a
pre-experimental study was carried on. To test the hypothesis, the researchers used a pre107

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

experiment study based on both quantitative method (pre-posttest, pre-post questionnaire)
and qualitative method (textual analysis) of data collection. The participants included 18
bachelor science students in High courses private school. The results obtained confirmed
the hypothesis, indicating that the participants experienced an improvement in their writing
skill.
Mingli (2019) examined “Using Mind Maps to Develop English Majors’ Essay Writing
in China” in which essay writing was introduced crucial for Chinese English majors for the
requirements of the TEM-4 (Test for English Majors-Band 4) and TEM-8. The author stated
that many students are weak in essay writing because they use Chinese thinking patterns
and structures to express their ideas, and lack frequent and sufficient writing practice. The
study has examined the concepts of mind mapping in writing and supported their
application in essay writing from word-level to whole essay structure by visual mind maps
in order to stimulate their creativity in English essay writing effectively.
O’Hara and Budiyono (2019) used a classroom action research design to identify
the improvement of argumentative essay scores of eleventh graders of Elyon Christian
School Surabaya in the 2013/2014 academic year through mind mapping. Furthermore,
the study was also carried on to provide a description of the process of teaching writing
through application of mind maps to the eleventh graders. The data were collected by
providing pre-tests, cycle process and post-tests. The results of the study showed
improvements in the students’ argumentative essay scores. It could be observed at the
average scores of the pre-test (62.5) and post-test (85.5). The research process lasted for
six weeks for completion, or twelve classroom meetings. It was also found that the
students followed the teaching-learning process well and they represented interest in the
lesson. According to the analyses, it was concluded that the eleventh graders of Elyon
Christian School Surabaya developed their argumentative essay writing score by the use
of mind mapping technique.
In total, according to the studies some of which were reviewed above, it was clear
that in the global context most of the research has been carried out with emphasis on the
effects of mind mapping on writing skills of students in schools and universities. It should
be noted that all these studies have emphasized on the meaningful effects of mind
mapping on the writing skills. The interesting common conclusion in all the mentioned
studies is that mastery on mind mapping has helped the participants to develop writing
skills and achieve higher gains in writing. Accordingly, as the studies indicate,
understanding and communication of ideas take place easier and in a more natural as well
as meaningful way using mind mapping.
2.2

Empirical studies in the local context

Studies in the context of mind mapping and English education in Iran do not indicate
a long history and it seems that this topic has recently attracted the attention of Iranian
scholars to itself. Unfortunately, there are limited studies on the topic of mind mapping and
language learning in Iran, and it can be even observed that just a few studies have
concentrated on mind mapping and writing skills among Iranian language learners. Two
more related articles are mentioned here:
Nemati, Jahandar and Khodabandehlou (2014) in their paper on the influence of
mind mapping on the improvement of advanced Iranian EFL learners’ essay writing
108

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

abilities via arrangement of information as well as thoughts have tried to study the
influence of application of mind mapping in the role of a pre-writing aid on improvement of
organization (as the major objective) and the total quality of Iranian EFL learners’ essay
writing efficiency at the advanced level. The study was performed on 40 EFL students
divided into an experimental as well as a control group. During the intervention period,
participants of the study learned how to create mind maps to generate ideas, connect
them by the means of codes, colors as well as pictures and eventually providing a wellstructured writing. Their results indicated enhancement of the essay writing abilities in the
experimental group.
Jafari and Zarei (2015) studied the impact of concept mapping on Iranian
intermediate EFL learners’ argumentative essay writing skill where they used an
experimental procedure among 60 adult EFL learners from a language institute in Isfahan,
Iran. The results indicated that instruction affected the students’ essay writing skill
significantly in the experimental group. On the other hand, no remarkable changes were
reported for the participants of the control group. According to the results of this study, it
was concluded that concept mapping strategy instruction is much influential in promoting
students’ argumentative essay writing.
Haji Maibodi (2017) studied the impact of mind mapping strategy on vocabulary use
in the writing of Iranian EFL learners in which 60 pre-intermediate female students from
two intact classes were selected from an English language institute in Ardakan, Yazd. At
the instructions to both groups, the results of the post-test obtained through the SPSS
software indicated that the experimental group outperformed the control group. The results
of the delayed post-test conducted after a month revealed that the long term effect of the
mind mapping strategy was significantly effective in the improvement of vocabulary used in
writing tasks of EFL learners participating in the experimental group.
As it was mentioned before, since these studies are new in Iran, there is a lot of
space to perform new studies and continue the previous research in order to generalize
the existing findings.

3 Research method
3.1

Participants

The population of this study consisted of 30 language learners of a well-known
institute, who had an intermediate level of English proficiency and whose level had been
determined through placement tests of the institute. They were all female and in the age
range of 15 to 20 years old. Before the study was performed, the researcher had a
meeting with the language learners in the institute in which she explained the objectives
and the procedures of the study. After providing sufficient information, they were asked to
participate voluntarily in the research project and they were also ensured about the
confidentiality of the results. The subjects were divided into two groups including 15
participants in each group. One of the classes was assigned to control group in which no
intervention was provided. The second group served as the experimental group which
received the intervention in order to be compared with the control group. The classes
started in summer because the students of schools and universities are free and can
participate in leisure time classes more conveniently.
109

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

DATA COLLECTION
An experimental research design was applied in the present research to answer the
research questions. Data collection was performed in three phases including pre-test,
during the course, and post-test. Before the intervention, the pretest was applied for and
experimental as well as control groups. They received identical writing pretest which asked
them to write a paragraph. The essay length and essay components related to the tasks
and skills were specified in the test instructions. Two raters graded these writing tasks in
order to achieve higher reliability. If the average was the same, teaching could be started.
Quizzes were frequently given to the learners during the experiment, and post-test, again
learners were asked to write on a specific topic and all the writings were reviewed and
graded by two raters after which the two groups were compared.
Measurement of students’ scores was performed through the scoring rubric which
was taken from Brown (2004, p. 243) and whose two aspects which were the focus of the
present article are represented here:
Table 1: The Scoring Rubric.
Aspect

20-18 (Excellent
to Good)

17-15 (Good
Adequate)

to

14-12 (Adequate
to Fair)

11-6

5-1

Organization, introduction, body, and conclusion

Unacceptable – Not college-level work
Suitable title,
efficient
introduction,
topic is
mentioned,
results in body;
transition
statements
applied,
organization of
materials
indicates
planning;
supporting
details provided
to generalize.

Suitable title,
introductory, and
concluding parts;
body of writing is
admissible but
there may be lack
of some evidence,
development of
some ideas isn’t
complete;
sequence is
rational but
transition
statements may
be missing or not
used properly.

Ordinary or
insufficient
introductory or
concluding parts;
problems in
arrangement of
thoughts in body;
the generalization
is not completely
supported by the
evidence
provided;
problems of
arrangement
intervene.

Weak or partially
specified
introductory part;
organization can
hardly be observed;
significant problems
in arrangement of
thoughts;
supporting details
are absent;
conclusion is poor
or irrational;
insufficient
endeavor to
organize.

Missing
introductory or
concluding
parts; no clear
arrangement of
body;
supporting
details are
seriously
absent; writer
has not tried to
arrange the
text.

110

Style and quality of expression

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

Exact use of
words;
employment of
parallel
structures; brief,
consistency
acceptable

Uses diversity;
good words; not
wordy;
consistency ok;
style relatively
brief

Improper use of
words; missing
attention to
consistency;
maybe too wordy

Improper statement
of ideas; problems
in words;
insufficient diversity
in structure

inconsistent
employment of
words; not
concept of
consistency or
sentence
variety

Source: from the authors.

Since this research was an experimental one that used an interval scale, the data
were analyzed by using independent T-Test to calculate the pre- as well as post-test
results.

4 Results
4.1

Research implementation
The research was conducted on 30 intermediate learners of English in two phases
including a pretest and posttest. The initial data required for the study were collected from
the pretest which was applied before the start of the study and the means of the scores in
each component were calculated and presented in a table. Then both groups had 20
sessions of writing class with the difference that the control group received conventional
teaching, while the experimental group received mind mapping technique as the
intervention. After the determined period of the study, the posttest was applied for both
groups and the mean scores were again recorded in tables. It should be emphasized that
the writings were corrected by two correctors including the researcher and the observer.
4.2

Scoring and addressing reliability concern

As it was mentioned before, to ascertain the reliability of the scoring procedure, a
research assistant was asked to evaluate the given scores to the students. The
researchers’ scores were compared against the assistant’s scores. Thus, inter-rater
reliability was calculated and exceeded 89%. According to Creswell (1995), this is
considered to be within the highest range of inter-rater reliability. Thus, for the subsequent
analyses reported below, the researchers’ scores were used as the basis of the analysis.
4.3

Results of the pre-test

Table 2 represents the descriptive statistics for the pre-test for the experimental as
well as control group. As shown in the Table the scores were similar in both groups.
111

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

Table 2: Descriptive statistics of pre-test on students’ performance on different aspects of writing.

Organization

Style

Groups of students

No.

Mean scores

SD

Control

15

13.40

1.47

Experimental

15

13.86

2.01

Control

15

13.53

2.08

15
12.8
Source: from the authors.

0.91

Experimental

In order to see if the scores of the students in experimental as well as control
groups are statistically similar, the scores were compared pairwise, through conducting a
series of independent T-tests. The relative statistics are shown in Table 3.
Table 3: Independent samples T-tests on students’ performance on pre-tests.
Aspects of writing

DF

T-value

Sig

Organization

28

0.11

0.26

Style

28

0.43
Source: from the authors.

0.09

In order to see the treatment effects on students’ scores in the post-test their scores
were calculated. As Table 4 shows, the experimental group achieved higher scores.
Table 4: Descriptive statistics of post-test on students’ performance on different aspects of writing.
Aspects of writing

Groups of students

No.

Mean scores

SD

Control

15

14.33

1.29

Experimental

15

15.26

1.27

Control

15

13.93

1.38

Experimental
15
Source: from the authors.

13.86

1.18

Organization

Style

As the following table indicates, a meaningful difference was found in the students’
scores in experimental and control for organization; however, the difference between the
two groups regarding style was not significant. This means that the treatment did not show
a significant impact on the style of students’ writing performance.

112

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

Table 5: Independent samples T-tests on students’ scores in post-tests.
Aspects of writing

DF

T-value

Sig

Organization

28

1.98

0.05

Style

28

0.141
Source: from the authors.

0.89

5 Discussion and conclusion
5.1

Discussion
The data indicate that the application of mind mapping technique has improved the
learners’ scores in organizing writings. This was proven by the mean of posttest which was
higher than the mean of pretest in the experimental group. This finding is also supported
by the results of data analysis from the questionnaire that showed most students
responded positively to this technique. The results of this study are in line with the findings
of several other studies which have been performed in similar fields.
The results obtained in this study are in line with the findings of the study
performed by Karimatul Fajri (2011) in which it was shown that mind mapping could
promote the students’ efficiency to organize their texts. In the same line, Saed & AL-Omari
(2014) concluded that mind mapping provided students with the chance to unify their
thoughts before writing and was therefore effective in improvement of organization of their
ideas. This finding is again consistent with the present research. In a more recent study, Al
Kamli (2019) concluded that students lacked organization as one of the problems in
writing. He found that mind mapping technique could improve the learners’ writing skills.
Finally, Mingli (2019) has also stated that mind mapping could affect the structure of writing
positively which is in line with the results obtained in this article. From the overall
perspective of writing improvement, the results of the present study are consistent with the
results of Lanseur and Haddouche (2019) and O’Hara and Budiyono (2019) who have
come to the conclusion that mind mapping can improve writing skills in general. In the local
context, the studies done by Nemati, Jahandar and Khodabandehlou (2014) and Jafari
and Zarei (2015) have also referred to the positive impacts of mind mapping on students’
writing aspects, particularly their organization of writing texts.

6 Conclusion
Considering the findings of the research and also the discussion, it can be said that
mind mapping technique has helped the students organize their texts. Mind mapping could
help students to develop their writing skills in terms of organizing ideas. Consequently,
mind mapping would be especially suitable to assist students in planning their writing,
since the technique stimulates them to obtain and establish a deeper understanding of the
writing topics.
From the researcher’s observations, it becomes clear that this procedure can be
employed for a variety of tasks associated with learning how to write. According to the
observations, students keep a variety of expectations as well as priorities, so that different
113

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

students may be satisfied with various aspects of mind mapping. According to what has
been shown, this strategy supports organization in learning and practicing writing skill.
Nevertheless, it depends exclusively on teachers and their students to what extent they
would handle the benefits of this technique. It can be particularly applied as the critical
strategy of language teaching, or it can play the role of an occasional option to make a
lesson more specific.
7 Acknowledgement
The authors would like to appreciate all participants of the study that patiently
attended the classes and cooperated sincerely during the study period and provided her
the possibility to complete the research. Furthermore, it should be acknowledged with
much appreciation the crucial role of the second rater who collaborated in students’
scoring.

References
AL-JARF, R. Teaching spelling skills with a mind-mapping software. Asian EFL Journal
Professional
Teaching
Articles,
53,p.
4-16,
2011.
Retrieved
from
http://70.40.196.162/PTA/Volume-53raj.pdf
ALJASER, A. M. The Effectiveness of Electronic Mind Maps in Developing Academic
Achievement and the Attitude towards Learning English among Primary School Students .
International Education Studies, v. 10, n. 12, 2017.
AL KAMLI, H. M. The Effect of Using Mind Maps to Enhance EFL Learners' Writing
Achievement and Students' Attitudes Towards Writing at Taif University. (Master Thesis),
Arab World English Journal (ID Number: 232), p. 1-92, 2019. DOI:
https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.232
AL NAGHBI, S. The use of mind mapping to develop writing skills in UAE schools, 2008.
Retrieved from: https://www.emeraldinsight.com. Accessed on: 20 August 2018.
BIKTIMIROV, E. N.; NILSON, L. B. Show them the money: Using mind mapping in the
introductory finance course. Journal of Financial Education, 32, p. 72-86, 2006.
BOROVKOVÁ, M. P. Application of mind maps in ELT with the emphasis in lexis.
Unpublished MA Thesis: Charles University in Prague, Prague, 2014.
BROWN, D. H. Language assessment: principles and classroom practices. New York:
Longman, 2003.
BURNS, B. Mind Mapping: 7 ways to use mind mapping as a developer, 2014. Retrieved
from: https://www.netguru.co/blog/mindmapping-7-ways-to-use. Accessed on: 20 August
2018.
BUZAN, T. Use both side of your brain. New York: E.P. Dutton Co, 1976.
114

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

CRESWELL, J. W. Research design: Qualitative and quantitative approaches. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage, 1995.
ERDIANA, N. Improving Students’ Writing Skill through Mind Mapping. Proceedings of the
1st EEIC Conference: Banda Aceh, Indonesia, 2016.
HAJI MAIBODI, A. The impact of mind mapping strategy on vocabulary use in the writing
of Iranian EFL learners. Unpublished M.A. thesis. Islamic Azad University, Maybod Branch,
2017.
INGEMANN, M. The power of mind mapping. London: John Benjamin Publishers, 2017.
JAFARI, N.; ZAREI, GH. R. The influence of concept mapping on iranian intermediate EFL
learners argumentative essay writing skill. Journal of applied linguistics and language
research, 2, p. 98-112, 2015.
KARIMATUL FAJRI, A. Improving Students’ Writing Skill by Using Mind Maps: A Classroom
Action Research on the 10th Grade Students. Unpublished MA thesis Sebelas Maret
University, 2011.
KHOIRIYAH. Increasing the students writing skills through mind mapping technique.
Nusantara of Research, 1, (2), p. 14-21, 2014.
KHUDHAIR, N. K. The impact of applying mind mapping technique as a prewriting tool on
EFL college students in essay writing. J Of College of Education for Women. 27 (1), p.
426-436, 2016. Retrieved from: https://www.iasj.net/iasj?func=fulltext&aId=117731.
Accessed on: Mai 12th, 2019.
LANSEUR, K.; HADDUCHE, S. Enhancing EFL Students’ Writing Skill through Mind
Mapping Strategy. The People’s Democratic Republic Of Algeria Ministry Of Higher
Education And Scientific Research Abderrahmane Mira University Of Bejaia Faculty Of
Arts And Languages Department Of English, 2019.
MINGLI, L. Using Mind Maps to Develop English Majors’ Essay Writing in China. Sino-US
English Teaching, v. 16, n. 10, p. 419-425, 2019.
NEMATI, A.; JAHANDAR, SH.; KHODABANDEHLOU, M. The effect of mind mapping
technique on the enhancement of advanced iranian EFL learners’ essay writing ability
through organizing information and thoughts. Indian Journal of Fundamental and Applied
Life Sciences, 7, p. 78-93, 2014.
NOURI MOHAMMED, A. Introducing the mind map technique to promote lesson
summarizing in EFL instruction: Case study of first year IMD student of the English
language. Unpublished PhD Dissertation at Mohamed Khieder University of Biskra
University: Lampour, India, 2013.
O’HARA, D.; BUDIYONO, B. Using Mind Mapping to Improve Argumentative Writing Score
115

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 2, p. 102-116, mai.-ago. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.24559

Of Eleventh Graders. Magister Scientiae, 106 Edisi No. 45, 2019.
RISWANTO; PUTRA, P. P. The Use of Mind Mapping Strategy in the Teaching of Writing at
SMAN 3 Bengkulu, Indonesia. International Jurnal of Humanities and Science, 2 (21), 6068, 2012.
SAED, H. A.; AL-OMARI, H. A. The effectiveness of a proposed program based on a mind
mapping strategy in developing the writing achievement of eleventh grade EFL students in
jordan and their attitudes towards writing. Journal of Education and Practice, 5, p. 88-109,
2014.
VITULLI, P.; GILES, R. Mind Mapping: Making Connections with Images and Color. Delta
Journal of Education, 6(2), p. 1-10, 2016.
Recebido em dia 18 de junho de 2020.
Aprovado em dia 07 de agosto de 2020.

116

