http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

MORPHOBR: AN OPEN SOURCE LARGE-COVERAGE FULL-FORM LEXICON FOR
MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF PORTUGUESE
MORPHOBR: UM LÉXICO DE FORMAS PLENAS DE AMPLA COBERTURA PARA A
ANÁLISE MORFOLÓGICA DO PORTUGUÊS

Leonel Figueiredo de Alencar
Universidade Federal do Ceará
leonel.de.alencar@ufc.br

Bruno Cuconato
EMAp/Fundação Getúlio Vargas
bcclaro@gmail.com

Alexandre Rademaker
EMAp/Fundação Getúlio Vargas and IBM Research
arademaker@gmail.com

ABSTRACT: One of the prerequisites for many natural language processing technologies
is the availability of large lexical resources. This paper reports on MorphoBr, an ongoing
project aiming at building a comprehensive full-form lexicon for morphological analysis of
Portuguese. A first version of the resource is already freely available online under an open
source, free software license. MorphoBr combines analogous free resources, correcting
several thousand errors and gaps, and systematically adding new entries. In comparison
to the integrated resources, lexical entries in MorphoBr follow a more user-friendly format,
which can be straightforwardly compiled into finite-state transducers for morphological
analysis, e.g. in the context of syntactic parsing with a grammar in the LFG formalism
using the XLE system. MorphoBr results from a combination of computational techniques.
Errors and the more obvious gaps in the integrated resources were automatically
corrected with scripts. However, MorphoBr's main contribution is the expansion in the
inventory of nouns and adjectives. This was carried out by systematically modeling
diminutive formation in the paradigm of finite-state morphology. This allowed MorphoBr to
significantly outperform analogous resources in the coverage of diminutives. The first
evaluation results show MorphoBr to be a promising initiative which will directly contribute
to the development of more robust natural language processing tools and applications
which depend on wide-coverage morphological analysis.
KEYWORDS: computational linguistics; natural language processing; morphological
analysis; full-form lexicon; diminutive formation.
RESUMO: Um dos pré-requisitos para muitas tecnologias de processamento de
linguagem natural é a disponibilidade de vastos recursos lexicais. Este artigo trata do
MorphoBr, um projeto em desenvolvimento voltado para a construção de um léxico de
formas plenas abrangente para a análise morfológica do português. Uma primeira versão
do recurso já está disponível gratuitamente on-line sob uma licença de software livre e de
código aberto. MorphoBr combina recursos livres análogos, corrigindo vários milhares de
1

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

erros e lacunas. Em comparação com os recursos integrados, as entradas lexicais do
MorphoBr seguem um formato mais amigável, o qual pode ser compilado diretamente em
transdutores de estados finitos para análise morfológica, por exemplo, no contexto do
parsing sintático com uma gramática no formalismo da LFG usando o sistema XLE.
MorphoBr resulta de uma combinação de técnicas computacionais. Erros e lacunas mais
óbvias nos recursos integrados foram automaticamente corrigidos com scripts. No
entanto, a principal contribuição de MorphoBr é a expansão no inventário de substantivos
e adjetivos. Isso foi alcançado pela modelação sistemática da formação de diminutivos no
paradigma da morfologia de estados finitos. Isso possibilitou a MorphoBr superar de forma
significativa recursos análogos na cobertura de diminutivos. Os primeiros resultados de
avaliação mostram que o MorphoBr constitui uma iniciativa promissora que contribuirá de
forma direta para conferir robustez a ferramentas e aplicações de processamento de
linguagem natural que dependem de análise morfológica de ampla cobertura.
PALAVRAS-CHAVE: linguística computacional; processamento de linguagem natural;
análise morfológica; léxico de formas plenas; formação de diminutivos.
1 Introduction
Morphological analysis is a prerequisite for syntactic parsing with linguistically
motivated formalisms like LFG (BUTT et al., 1999; FALK, 2001; DIPPER, 2003), HPSG
(POLLARD; SAG, 1994), and GF (RANTA, 2011). Moreover, it is useful in a wide range of
applications ranging from dictionary lookup in e-book readers and spell-checkers to
sentiment analysis, opinion mining, information extraction, and text classification
algorithms. It maps word forms to all possible representations consisting of lemma and
grammatical features, which may be filtered by subsequent processing steps (BEESLEY;
KARTTUNEN, 2003; DIPPER, 2003; JURAFSKY; MARTIN, 2009).
As Alencar et al. (2014, p. 59-60) observes, "finite-state transducers, due to
compact storage and fast processing, have been a preferred implementation of
morphological analyzers''. A finite-state transducer (henceforth FST) is a two-tape
automaton. In the case of a morphological analyzer, the first tape encodes the analysis (or
parse) strings and the second tape the surface strings, i.e. word forms (BEESLEY;
KARTTUNEN, 2003).

Figure 1: Example of a single-path FST.

Figure 1 exemplifies a simple FST relating the analysis string ver+V+PRF+1+SG to
the surface string vi 'I saw', first person singular perfect indicative tense of Portuguese
verb ver 'see'. This FST has 8 states connected by 7 arcs, constituting a single path from
the initial state 0 to the final state 7. Each path in an FST represents an analysis string with
its corresponding surface string. The arcs are labelled by symbol pairs of the form x:y,
where x is a symbol of the analysis string and y is a symbol of the surface string. Labels of
the form x:x are simplified to x. Label 0 represents the empty string.
2

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

Large lexical transducers with millions of paths were compiled for many languages,
using a variety of finite-state tools (BEESLEY; KARTTUNEN, 2003; HULDEN, 2009), and
used in diverse applications, for example in industrial-scale LFG grammars for deep
syntactic parsing with the Xerox Linguistic Environment (XLE) (BUTT et al., 1999;
DIPPER, 2003). One additional advantage of FSTs is that they are inherently bidirectional
devices, so the same FST can serve both as a generator and an analyzer.
The construction of a wide-coverage morphological analyzer is a continuous task
that goes through successive refinements. Ideally one starts from available electronic
dictionaries consisting of several hundreds of thousands of word-parse pairs, so-called fullform lexicons, that can be compiled directly into an FST. However, one difficulty in reusing
existent resources is that they usually adopt incompatible annotation schemes or fail to
provide information that is needed for a full-fledged morphological analyzer. Besides, these
resources may have errors and inconsistencies. Although many such deficiencies can be
automatically corrected using simple text processing techniques, overcoming some of
these problems may be less than trivial.
A more challenging task is expanding the coverage of existent dictionaries in order
to deal with new words. Finite-state morphology is the standard approach to tackle this
problem (BEESLEY; KARTTUNEN, 2003). It facilitates the computational modeling of
grammatical regularities underlying inflection and word formation processes. From these
models FSTs can be compiled for analysis and generation of new lemmas and word forms
(ALENCAR et al., 2014).
In this paper we present MorphoBr, a full-form lexicon constructed from the
combination, revision, and expansion of available free analog resources for Portuguese,
mostly derived from Label-Lex (ELEUTÉRIO et al., 1995) and Unitex-PB (MUNIZ, 2004).
This effort is part of a research project that aims at developing wide-coverage
computational grammars for deep parsing of Portuguese texts. A first version of the
resource is already freely available online under an open source, free software license 1.
The main advancement of MorphoBr in relation to previous resources is a finitestate component that almost triples the inventories of nouns and adjectives by
computationally modeling the formation of diminutives with - (z)inh-. This is one of the most
productive derivational processes in Portuguese. Diminutives mainly function as a means
of expressing speakers' emotions and attitudes. As such, they are very common in
emotive discourse. Therefore, processing diminutives should be a basic capability of
systems dealing with sentiment analysis, opinion mining, etc.
In the next section, we briefly introduce the previous resources that were combined
into MorphoBr. In section 3 we first give an overview of the present stage of MorphoBr,
describing the format used and explaining the conversion from the source formats. We
also detail errors and inconsistencies that we found in the resources and how we solved
them. In section 4 we report on the finite-state implementation of diminutive formation in
Portuguese. Section 5 presents evaluation experiments, showing that MorphoBr
outperforms the resources it integrates. The last section sums up the main results and
points out directions for further research.

1

URL: https://github.com/LFG-PTBR/MorphoBr
3

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

2 Full-form lexicons for Portuguese
LABEL-LEX is a collection of resources. 2 According to Eleutério et al. (1995), the
LABEL-LEX dictionaries originate from Costa and Melo (1991). In Ranchhod, Mota, and
Baptista (1999), the authors describe a new version of the system, composed of a lexicon
and grammars. The lexical data are organized according to the formal complexity of the
lexical units. In the current version, the lexicon is organized in three different files: LABELLEX-sw (inflected forms), LABEL-LEX-mw (multi-word forms), and LABEL-LEX-gr
(grammars)3. Only the first one is freely available for download. The LABEL-LEX-sw
version 4.1 contains 938,445 word-parse pairs, e.g. gato,gatar.V:P1s. In this entry, the
lemma gatar 'to fail' and the verb category label V are assigned to the word form gato,
classifying it as first person singular of the indicative present.
LABEL-LEX resources were expanded (with adaptations) and integrated in many
different systems over time. To mention some of them UNITEX 4, INTEX5, and FreeLing
(PADRÓ; STANILOVSKY, 2012). In Garcia and Gamallo (2010), the authors describe the
integration of Label-Lex dictionary into FreeLing and its conversion to the EAGLES tag
schema (LEACH; WILSON, 1996). Besides the tags conversion, many other adaptations
were done to mitigate conflicts between morphological decisions of the dictionaries and of
the data collected from annotated corpora. The current Portuguese dictionary in FreeLing
version 4.0 is composed of 1,214,093 word forms.
Later, Garcia et al. (2014) presents different dictionaries of the new orthography as
well as a new freely available testing corpus, containing different varieties and textual
typologies. The combined European and Brazilian Portuguese dictionary expanded the
FreeLing dictionary with more 492,896 word-parse pairs. Considering all the additions and
improvements to the Label-Lex distribution made by Garcia and Gamalo, we opted to use
the Garcia and FreeLing files (henceforth GFL) instead of the Label-Lex distribution.
Following the European projects, the Brazilian NILC group developed their own
lexical resource in the context of the Unitex-PB project (MUNIZ, 2004) 6. It is divided into
four files: DELAS-PB (single-word lemmas), DELAF-PB (inflected forms), inflectional
graphs, and DELACF-PB (multi-word forms). Version 2 from May 2015 of DELAF-PB
contains 9,072,338 word-parse pairs, of which more than 8 million are verbs, 80,000 are
nouns, and 90,000 are adjectives.
Both FreeLing and DELAF-PB are freely distributed under free software, open
source licenses. FreeLing dictionaries are obtained from different open-source external
projects, so they have different copyright holders and different licenses than the rest of
FreeLing packages. Nevertheless, both FreeLing's Portuguese dictionary and DELAF-PB
are freely distributed under free software, open source licenses. The former is available
under the General Public License 3, the same license of the original LABEL-LEX
distribution7. The latter is distributed under the GNU Lesser General Public License 2.1 8,
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

URL: http://label.ist.utl.pt/pt/labellex_pt.php
Only the first one is still freely available for download.
URL: http://unitexgramlab.org
URL: http://intex.univ-fcomte.fr
URL: http://www.nilc.icmc.usp.br/nilc/projects/unitex-pb/web/
URL: http://nlp.lsi.upc.edu/freeling/index.php/node/1
URL: http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl-2.1.html
4

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

which is approved by both the Free Software Foundation 9 and the Open Source Initiative10.
This means that end-users can freely use these libraries and developers can modify them
and share the modified versions.
These two resources differ in how they handle derived words. While Unitex-PB lists
all diminutives with - (z)inh- in DELAF-PB, FreeLing 4.0 applies affixation rules to analyze
formations like dorzinha at runtime (i.e. during text analysis), correctly classifying them as
diminutive forms of the corresponding lemma (dor 'pain' in the case at hand). However,
FreeLing's dictionary contains more than 5,000 - (z)inh- diminutives derived from nouns
and adjectives, including hundreds of completely regular formations (e.g. abelhinha,
abertinho, and amorzinho, derived from abelha 'bee', aberto 'open', and amor 'love',
respectively) and cases with predictable stem alterations (e.g. amiguinho from amigo
'friend' and aneizinhos from anel 'ring' in plural), which could be analyzed by means of
such rules. This shows that FreeLing does not consistently handle regular diminutive
formation in Portuguese by means of rules as a means to spare storage space.

3 The resource
The present version of MorphoBr comprises the most numerous word classes,
namely, nouns, adjectives, adverbs, and verbs. The other classes will be incrementally
added in the next development stages. The major part of the data derives from the
corresponding entries from DELAF-PB, which were not only converted to the format
described below, but also corrected, enriched, or supplemented. The rest of the data
consists of the following sets: (i) the set difference between GFL and DELAF-PB and (ii)
the expansions described in section 4.
Tokenization decisions affect what counts as candidate for entry in a full-form
lexicon. This is specially the case with verb-clitic clusters in Portuguese, which in principle
can be treated as a single unit or tokenized into two different units, each one with its own
entry in the dictionary. In Portuguese, clitic pronouns can occur in three contexts: (i) leftadjacent to the verb in proclitic position, (ii) right-adjacent to the verb in enclitic position, or
(iii) between infinitive base form11 and inflectional endings in mesoclitic position, as
exemplified in (1), (2), and (3), respectively. In these interlinear glosses, as in analogous
examples in this paper, we use the Leipzig Glossing Rules 12, the most widespread
conventions for glossing linguistic examples. While the clitic is separated from the verb by
a blank in proclitic position, in enclitic and mesoclitic position it is separated by one and
two hyphens, respectively.
(1) nos visitávamos
nos=visitávamos
9 URL: http://www.gnu.org/licenses/license-list.html#SoftwareLicenses
10 URL: https://opensource.org/licenses
11 The -ar ending of the verb form in mesoclitic clusters corresponds historically to the infinitive ending
(VILLALVA; SILVESTRE, 2016, p. 138). Elsewhere, however, the a segment functions as thematic vowel
and r is part of the tense-mood morpheme, compare (3) with nos visitaremos 'we will visit ourselves'.
12 URL: https://www.eva.mpg.de/lingua/resources/glossing-rules.php
5

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

REFL;1PL;ACC=visit:IMPF;1PL
'we visited ourselves'
(2) visitávamo-nos
visitávamo=nos
visit:IMPF;1PL=REFL;1PL;ACC
'we visited ourselves'
(3) visitar-nos-emos
visitar=nos=emos
visit=REFL;1PL;ACC=FUT;1PL
'we will visit ourselves'
In cases where the pronominal clitic is not separated from the verb by a blank, we
adopted DELAF-PB's strategy of handling the verb-clitic cluster as a single token with its
own entry in the dictionary, as exemplified in (4) and (5), glossed in (2) and (3). GFL
adopts a different strategy in this regard, assigning clitic and verb form to different entries.
Thus, when converting data from GFL to MorphoBr, verb entries like (6) were discarded,
because this verb form is only used with an enclitic pronoun, as in (2). The canonical form
is the one in example (1).
(4) visitávamo-nos,visitar.V+PRO:I1p
(5) visitar-nos-emos,visitar.V+PRO:F1p
(6) visitávamo visitar VMII1P0
The dictionary entry format used in MorphoBr corresponds to the standard format in
finite-state morphology (BEESLEY; KARTTUNEN, 2003). It consists of pairs of the form
(w, p) separated by a NEWLINE, where w is a word form and p is an analysis string,
separated by a TAB. The analysis string consists of a series of tags, the first one being the
lemma. The other tags represent morphosyntactic features 13. Tags are separated by a plus
sign (a dot is used to separate the features of clitics, see below). In (7), the lemma
comprar 'to buy' is assigned to the verb form comprei, classified as first person singular of
the indicative perfect tense:
(7) comprei comprar+V+PRF+1+SG
The tagset used in MorphoBr was designed to be more mnemonic than the formats
of the two resources it draws upon. For this reason, tags are mnemonic abbreviations,
generally following conventions common in the linguistic literature. Almost all tags were
drawn from Fradin (s.d.), whose tagset represents an improvement in relation to the one of
the Leipzig Glossing Rules14. By contrast, many tags in DELAF-PB, as shown in Table 1,
are completely arbitrary single-letter abbreviations which are difficult to decode.
Table 1: Comparison between tags from DELAF-PB and MorphoBr.
13 The complete documentation of the tagset is available in the project repository.
14 SBJR (for present subjunctive) and PQP (for pluperfect) are among the few exceptions. In this case, the
corresponding categories are missing in Fradin (s.d.).
6

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

DELAF-PB

MorphoBr

Meaning

W

INF

infinitive

K

PASSPT

passive participle

J

PRF

perfect indicative

S

SBJR

present subjunctive

T

SBJP

past (imperfect) subjunctive

U

SBJF

future subjunctive

Y

IMP

imperative

Tags in FreeLing are less arbitrary compared to DELAF-PB. However, FreeLing
departs from widely accepted assumptions in linguistics. First, it represents mood and
tense by two different tags. However, in the morphological analysis of Portuguese, these
two types of information are usually represented by one single inflectional suffix
(MONTEIRO, 1987; ROCHA, 2008; VILLALVA; SILVESTRE, 2014). 15 Second, the left-toright order of the tags in FreeLing does not always reflect the concatenation of the
morphemes representing the individual morphosyntactic features. This is the case with the
diminutive forms of nouns, as in example (8) from FreeLing. In these forms, gender and
number tags F and P (feminine and plural, respectively) precede diminutive tag D.
However, in the surface form abelhinhas (diminutive of abelha 'bee'), glossed in (9), the
diminutive suffix -inh- precedes the inflectional endings representing feminine plural.
(8) abelhinhas abelha NCFP00D
(9) abelh-inh-a-s
bee-DIM-F-PL
In entries for diminutive forms of adjectives, however, the tags in FreeLing do reflect
morpheme concatenation order, as can be seen in (10). In this example, tag C, which
represents the diminutive morpheme of adjectives, precedes the gender and number tags.
(10) abertinhas aberto AQCFP00
(11) abert-inh-a-s
open-DIM-F-PL
Differently than FreeLing, MorphoBr handles the diminutive of nouns and adjectives
uniformly, since there is no morphological difference between the formation of diminutives
in these two word classes. In MorphoBr, the order of tags encoding morphosyntactic
features of nouns, adjectives, and verbs directly reflect the order of the corresponding
15 MorphoBr represents person and number of verb forms by different tags, although these constitute one
single morpheme according to Monteiro (1987), among others. The reason for this discrepancy resides in
the mapping of morphological tags onto subject agreement features in the syntax. Both finite verb forms
and adjective forms encode number information, but only the former encode person information. This
shows person and number to be independent from one another.
7

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

morphemes, as exemplified in (12) and (13)16:
(12)
(13)
(14)

abelhinhas
abelha+N+DIM+F+PL
abertinhas
aberto+A+DIM+F+PL
comprá-va-mos comprar+V+IMPF+1+PL
buy-IMPF-1PL

One of the main goals of MorphoBr is morphological analysis with FSTs in the
context of syntactic parsing. The entry format adopted allows for straightforward
conversion to the so called spaced-text format exemplified in (15), where word characters
and tags are separated by a blank. This format, in turn, can be compiled into an FST with
the proprietary Xerox Finite-State Tools (XFST) (BEESLEY; KARTTUNEN, 2003) or with
Foma (HULDEN, 2009), its free-software, open source clone, using the command read
spaced-text. In (15), the first line maps to the upper (analysis string or lexical) language of
the transducer, while the second line maps to the lower (or surface string) language
(BEESLEY; KARTTUNEN, 2003).
(15)
c o m p r a r +V +PRF +1 +SG
comprei
The format used in MorphoBr also allows for the enrichment of the annotation of
verb-clitic clusters such as (2) and (3), since DELAF-PB provides no lemma or
morphosyntactic information for clitics in enclitic or mesoclitic position, as evidenced by (4)
and (5), where the +PRO tag only specifies that the verb is conjoined with a clitic. Clitic
properties, however, are crucial for deep syntactic parsing and semantic analysis in
formalisms like LFG, because the clitic realizes an argument of the verb (FALK, 2001).
Therefore, in MorphoBr, the +PRO tag from DELAF-PB is substituted by one of our
conversion tools for a sequence of tags representing the grammatical properties of the
clitic.
Table 2: Comparison between DELAF-PB'S and MorphoBr's annotation of verb-clitic clusters (tags in italics
and explanations in quotes).

DELAF-PB

.V

+PRO

MorphoBr

+V .ele ‘he’ “lemma”

.ACC
.3
.M.PL

“clitic pronoun”

I3p

“imperfect
indicative 3rd
person plural"

+IMPF+3+PL

“imperfect
indicative 3rd
person plural”

“accusative”
“3rd person”
“masculine plural”

16 In Portuguese, as in other inflectional languages (as opposed to agglutinative languages such as
Turkish), it is often the case that different morphosyntactic features are collapsed in one single affix. For
example, in compro 'I buy', suffix -o represents both present indicative and first person singular.
8

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

+V .nós 'we' "lemma"
.AD
1.PL

+IMPF+3+PL

"accusative or dative"
"1st person plural"

"imperfect
indicative 3rd
person plural"

This conversion is not always a simple string replacement operation, because clitic
nos can be ambiguous in relation to lemma depending on the verb form. While this clitic
unambiguously represents accusative or dative of nós 'we' in entries like (4) and (5), it can
be lemmatized in a two-fold way in entries like like (16), namely, either as nós 'we' or as
eles 'they'. Our conversion tool successfully handles all these verb-clitic clusters, assigning
the clitic in each case the corresponding lemma and inflectional informations. Accordingly,
entry (16) is converted to the two entries (17) and (18), where the lemma ambiguity is
resolved: in (17), the lemma of the clitic is ele 'he', while it is nós 'we' in (18).17
(16) compravam-nos, comprar.V+PRO:I3p
(17) compravam-nos comprar+V.ele.ACC.3.M.PL+IMPF+3+PL
(18) compravam-nos comprar+V.nós.AD.1.PL+IMPF+3+PL
Table 2 shows the correlation between the different components of the annotation of
entries (16)-(18). Tags describing properties of clitics are separated by a dot instead of the
plus sign used for the other tags. This distinction is relevant for syntactic processing. For
example, .PL and +PL both encode plural number, but the former specifies the number of
an object of the verb, while the latter specifies the number of the subject. 18
Two aspects of the annotation scheme adopted for verb-clitic clusters in cases like
(17) and (18) should be highlighted. First, the relative order of the individual tags
describing properties of clitics is somewhat arbitrary, because these elements consist of
portmanteau morphemes, conflating different properties in one single morphological unit.
For example, clitic nos conflates case, person, and number in one single morpheme. A
clitic such as las, however, can be segmented into different gender and number
morphemes, motivating the tag sequence F.PL., as exemplified in (19).
The second aspect refers to the the position of clitic tags as a whole in relation to
inflectional tags of the verb. Due to direct translation of tag sequence .V+PRO from
DELAF-PB in the way specified in Table 2, clitic tags precede verb inflectional tags. In this
case, annotation does not mirror morpheme concatenation, since the enclitic pronoun
follows the verb. In mesoclitic clusters, however, the clitic precedes the inflectional suffixes
of the verb, see (20), so that morpheme concatenation is obeyed. We leave for a future
version of MorphoBr a solution to this discrepancy.
17 Entry (18) is ambiguous between accusative and dative case. In Portuguese, this case ambiguity
pervades the pronominal system: the formal distinction between accusative and dative is neutralized in
all clitic pronouns except those of the 3rd person, e.g. accusative form o and dative form lhe of ele 'he'.
To take this state of affairs into account, we collapsed dative and accusative case of 1st and 2nd person
clitics into the composite tag .AD, thereby preventing the duplication of hundred thousands of entries.
The annotation of clitics is further explained below.
18 See Dipper (2003) for a detailed explanation on how morphological tags (e.g. +DIM, +M, .M, +PL , .PL
etc.) are converted to syntactical constraints in an LFG grammar implemented in the XLE system.
9

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

(19) compramo-las comprar+V.ele.ACC.3.F.PL+PRF+1+PL
(20) comprar-lhe-emos
comprar+V.ele.DAT.3.SG+FUT+1+PL
For the conversion between the different formats, two tools were developed and are
made available in the project repository. The first tool is an ad hoc Python script that
converts from DELAF-PB's format to MorphoBr's. The second tool adopts a more
systematic approach. It performs conversion between DELAF-PB's, GFL's format and
MorphoBr's using a declarative approach. However, it can not enrich the annotation of
clitics yet.
Using the GF programming language, we wrote a set of grammars that specify how
abstract trees (encoding the dictionaries entries data) are mapped to strings in each
dictionary's concrete format. GF grammars specify both parsers and printers, so we are
able to use them to translate between different formats by parsing a string in a certain
format to an abstract tree, and then printing it in another format (with some preprocessing
to handle the spacing).
In the example below, we can see a GFL-formatted entry being parsed to an
abstract syntax tree in the first output line. The following lines show the linearization of this
abstract syntax tree in MorphoBr's format, which in this case corresponds to two entries,
one for each gender (forms that admit two genders are collapsed into one "common
gender'' in the GFL representation).
(21)
Morpho> import MorphoMBR.gf MorphoFL.gf
Morpho> parse -tr -lang=FL "dentistas dentista N C C P 0 0 0"
| linearize -all -lang=MBR
mkN "dentistas" "dentista" (mkNF Common Pl ZDegree)
dentistas
dentista +N +M +PL
dentistas
dentista +N +F +PL
Table 3: Examples of incongruences in the encoding of homonymous verb forms in DELAF-PB (incomplete
paradigms lack some or all forms).

Types of
homonymous
forms

Lexical representations

Total
Paradigm
number of coverage
entries

comprava

1st person singular of imperfect
indicative of the 1st conjugation

12714

complete

3rd person singular of imperfect
indicative of the 1st conjugation

0

incomplete

1st person singular of imperfect
indicative of the 2nd conjugation

800

complete

3rd person singular of imperfect
indicative of the 2nd conjugation

800

complete

1st person singular of pluperfect of the

12714

complete

vendia

comprara

10

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

1st conjugation

vendera

comprar

vender

3rd person singular of pluperfect of the
1st conjugation

5

incomplete

1st person singular of pluperfect of the
2nd conjugation

800

complete

3rd person singular of pluperfect of the
2nd conjugation

800

complete

1st person singular of future subjunctive 12714
of the 1st conjugation

complete

3rd person singular of future subjunctive 12714
of the 1st conjugation

complete

1st person singular of future subjunctive 800
of the 2nd conjugation

complete

3rd person singular of future subjunctive 72
of the 2nd conjugation

incomplete

While converting DELAF-PB's entries to our format, we found numerous errors and
inconsistencies in the original data. Just a few problems of this sort were detected when
converting GFL's data. All detected problems were corrected either by the format
conversion tools or by shell scripts. Due to space limitations, we limit ourselves here to the
more significant examples.
DELAF-PB has 318,683 repeated entries. It contains 176 simple formatting errors
due to spurious colons in inappropriate places, compare the incorrectly formatted entries in
(22a) and (23a) with the corrected counterparts in (22b) and (23b), respectively.
(22)
(23)

a. abstinhas:-lhe,abster.V+PRO:I2s
b. abstinhas-lhe,abster.V+PRO:I2s
a. mantinhas:,manter.V:I2s
b. mantinhas,manter.V:I2s

There are 3070 verb-clitic clusters without the obligatory separator hyphen, e.g.
pruirlhes,pruir.V+PRO:W3s instead of pruir-lhes,pruir.V+PRO:W3s. In 714 entries, the last
character is number 1 instead of letter s (singular), e.g. abstrair,abstrair.V:W31. Another
problem are 26,151 systematically missing verb forms: 1st conjugation verbs lack 3rd
person singular forms of imperfect indicative (all forms missing) and pluperfect (all but 5
missing), while most 2nd conjugation verbs lack the 3rd person singular of future
subjunctive (728 forms missing from a total of 800). In all these cases, the missing 3rd
person singular forms are identical to the corresponding 1st person singular forms, as
exemplified in Table 3.
One could argue that these forms were omitted following a general design decision
to spare storage space. However, the evidence counters this assumption, suggesting that
the omissions are unexpected side-effects of the lexicon compilation process. In fact,
DELAF-PB's documentation does not refer to this lexicon-size reduction strategy. If it were
implemented, there should be a special tag for collapsing the person information of the
11

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

homonymous forms. Instead, the usual tag combination 1s for 1st person singular is used.
Moreover, as Table 3 shows, DELAF-PB does explicitly encode both members of similar
pairs of homonymous forms, such as 1st and 3rd person singular forms of both imperfect
indicative and pluperfect of 2nd conjugation verbs.

4 Expanding lexical coverage by means of FSTs
Diminutive formation is one of the most productive derivational processes in
Portuguese (ROCHA, 2008, p. 122-123). In this language, there are more than 20
diminutive suffixes (CUNHA; CINTRA, 1985). These suffixes underlie lexicalized words
from different lexical categories, ranging from nouns and adjectives to adverbs, numerals,
personal pronouns, and verbs (RIO-TORTO, 2016, p. 359). They are continually used for
the creation of new words. In fact, every noun and every adjective can have a diminutive
form (LAPA, 1982, p. 77-82; ROCHA, 2008, p. 123; LIMA, 2011, p. 137). Among the
diminutive suffixes, -inh- and -zinh- are the most productive (LAPA, 1982, p. 79; CUNHA;
CINTRA, 1985, p. 91-92; RIO-TORTO, 2016, p. 373). This section describes a finite-state
implementation of the formation of diminutives from these two suffixes in Portuguese. The
goal of this implementation was expanding the coverage of MorphoBr, since the integrated
resources have tens of thousands of gaps in this regard.
Denotatively, diminutive suffixes form hyponyms from nouns or modulate the
intensity of adjectives, but more often they just convey speaker's emotions or attitudes,
e.g. appreciation, dislike, empathy, politeness, etc. (LAPA, 1982; CUNHA; CINTRA, 1985;
ROCHA, 2008; BAZENGA, 2012; VILLALVA; SILVESTRE, 2014; RIO-TORTO, 2016),
being very common in emotive discourse, opinion or persuasive texts, etc. Therefore,
analyzing diminutives should be a basic capability of NLP systems targeted at sentiment
analysis, opinion mining, text classification, etc.
Out of the total of 361,485 nouns and adjectives converted from DELAF-PB and
GFL (henceforth DGFL-ADJN), only 15,938 are diminutives, 10,338 of which are formed
with -(z)inh- . Consequently, there are many gaps in these resources, because, for tens of
thousands of words, they do not provide the corresponding diminutive. In DELAF-PB, for
example, there are diminutives for cobra 'snake', jacaré 'alligator', zebra 'zebra', gavião
'hawk', and cheiro 'smell', but not for elefante 'elephant', javali 'boar', jumento 'donkey',
amor 'love', odor 'smell', and dor 'pain'. Another deficiency of DELAF-PB and GFL is the
lack of -zinh- for corresponding -inh- diminutives. For example, both resources include
cobrinha (diminutive of cobra 'snake'), but not the equally grammatical parallel form
cobrazinha. All these gaps seem completely arbitrary. In fact, the corresponding
diminutives can easily be found in texts on the Internet, e.g.:
(24) cobrazinha, amorzinho, dorzinha, elefantinho, elefantezinho, jumentinho,
jumentozinho
To fill these gaps, we took the standard assumption that the lexicon of a natural
language consists not only of existent words, but also includes potential words, i.e. words
that can be created by applying word-formation rules to existent words (ROCHA, 2008;
12

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

VILLALVA; SILVESTRE, 2014). Finite-state morphology is the standard paradigm for the
construction of rule-based computational models of inflectional and word-formation
processes. This approach has two strengths. First, morphological processes can be
formalized in a way that closely mirrors linguistic descriptions. Thus, one does not have to
reinvent the wheel when implementing a certain morphological phenomenon already
described in detail in the linguistic literature. All one needs to do is to translate the
description from a natural language into a formal specification. Second, this formal
specification can be compiled into an FST using free, open source software, e.g. Foma
(HULDEN, 2009). The resulting FST, in turn, can be used in a compact and efficient way
during text processing.
Our implementation of diminutive formation with -inh- and -zinh- generally follows
the analysis by Villalva and Silvestre (2014) and Rio-Torto (2016), according to which there
are two types of diminutive suffixes in Portuguese: evaluative suffixes (-inh-, -it-, etc.) and
z-evaluative suffixes (-zinh-, -zit-, etc).
As Villalva and Silvestre (2014, p. 119-120) points out, there is some variation in the
distribution of these two types of suffixes across different dialects of Portuguese. A typical
case of regional divergence are -inh- diminutives like anelinho (from anel 'ring'), derived
from stems ending in l in singular (with a null thematic marker surfacing as e in plural),
which are restricted to European Portuguese. Besides, there are preference differences
between speakers or depending on word length or frequency. Diminutives from longer,
less frequent words like parlamento 'parliament' are preferably constructed with zevaluative suffixes. Accordingly, while both parlamentozinho and parlamentinho are
grammatical, the former is considered more acceptable.
Abstracting away from these factors, the generalization holds that evaluative
suffixes are restricted to stems of words ending with one of the thematic unstressed
vowels -o, -a, and -e (e.g. cheiro, zebra, and elefante), while z-evaluative suffixes, as
exemplified in Table 4, attach to inflected words. Therefore, for the first group of words,
both types of suffixes are licensed (cf. cobrinha and cobrazinha from cobra ['kɔbrɐ]
'snake'), while all other words only license z-evaluative suffixes (compare cafezinho and
*cafeinho from café [kɐ'fɛ] 'foot' or motorzinho and *motorinho from motor 'motor').
Table 4: Examples of diminutives with -zinh- derived from plural forms.

Singular base form

Plural base form

Singular and plural diminutives

menino 'boy'

meninos

meninozinho meninozinhos

menina 'girl'

meninas

meninazinha meninazinhas

flor 'flower'

flores

florzinha florezinhas

luz 'light'

luzes

luzinha luzezinhas

alemão 'German'

alemães

alemãozinho alemãezinhos

azul 'blue'

azuis

azulzinho azuizinhos

Apparent exceptions to this generalization are due to adjustments in the
orthographic shape of the concatenated elements, due to general orthographic or
phonological constraints in the language, e.g. lapisinho from lápis 'pencil' can be explained
13

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

by deletion of z from -zinh-. Other exceptions are lexicalized words like colherinha
(diminutive of colher 'spoon'). In deviation from the productive pattern in the standard
language, the -inh- suffix in this example applies to a base ending in a phoneme other than
one of the thematic vowels -o, -a, and -e. Examples like *reporterinho (from repórter
'reporter') evidence that this pattern is not productive.
In the two-level approach in finite-state morphology, morphological regularities are
factorized into two modules (BEESLEY; KARTTUNEN, 2003). The morphotactics component describes the possible combinations of morphemes. In the second module, morphographemic alternations handle allomorphy, i.e. changes in the orthographical form of morphemes when combined to build new words or word forms (ŠEVČÍKOVÁ, 2018)19. While
some alternations reflect phonological changes affecting pronunciation, as in lapisinho referred to above, other alternations are purely orthographical, as exemplified in Table 5.
Table 5: Examples of orthographical changes not affecting pronunciation.

lemma

base stem

diminutive

stem alomorph

orthographical
change

beiço 'lip'

beiç [bejs]

beicinho

beic [bejs]

ç=>c

amigo 'friend'

amig [ɐ'mig]

amiguinho

amigu [ɐ'mig]

g => gu

faca 'knife'

fac [fak]

faquinha

faqu [fak]

c => qu

Following the two-level approach, we modeled the morphotactical phenomena in
the formation of - (z)inh- diminutives by means of a grammar in the LEXC formalism. This
a high-level declarative language that enables the specification of finite-state automata
and transducers in a linguistically intuitive way (BEESLEY; KARTTUNEN, 2003). Both
XFST and Foma, its free software, open source counterpart, provide compilers for LEXC.
A LEXC grammar specifies different classes of elements, modeled as LEXICONS,
and the possible combinations between them, as in the oversimplified example in (25).
This example generates the -(z)inh- diminutive forms of alegre 'happy'. The first line
declares the symbols that constitute multicharacter arc labels in the FST the grammar
compiles into. The following lines specify five LEXICONS, each consisting of one or more
entries. The first element in each entry is a pair of the form x:y, where x is a fragment of
the analysis string and y is a fragment of the surface string. Typically, this pair represents a
morpheme, i.e. an atomic unit of meaning and form. The identity relation x:x can be
encoded as x. The empty string is represented by 0. The second element in an entry is a
continuation class, which defines the LEXICON the x:y pair can be concatenated with. The
number sign "#" represents the end of a word. This grammar compiles into an FST relating
analysis strings like alegre+A+DIM+F+PL to their corresponding surface forms,
alegre^inh^a^s and alegre^zinh^a^s in this case, where the caret "^" represents a
morpheme boundary. These are intermediate forms which are converted to the actual
forms alegrinhas and alegrezinhas by conditional replacement rules in the module
encoding morphographemic alternations, see Beesley and Karttunen (2003) for a detailed
explanation.
19 In this paper, we restrict ourselves to the orthographical representation of words and morphemes. The
two-level approach, however, is not restricted to this level. It can be also applied to phonological
representations (BEESLEY; KARTTUNEN, 2003).
14

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

(25)
Multichar_Symbols +A +DIM +M +F +SG +PL
LEXICON Root
alegre Lemma ;
LEXICON Lemma
+A:0 Suffix ;
LEXICON Suffix
+DIM:^inh
Gender ;
+DIM:^zinh
Gender ;
LEXICON Gender
+M:^o Number ;
+F:^a Number ;
LEXICON Number
+SG:0# ;
+PL:^s
#;
Long-distance dependencies between elements of non-adjacent classes can be
elegantly modeled by means of unification-based constraints named flag diacritics
(BEESLEY; KARTTUNEN, 2003). These constraints function as filters at runtime during
parsing and generation, blocking ungrammatical paths. Obtaining the same effects in a
LEXC grammar without resorting to flag diacritics makes the code less intuitive.
Alternatively, as Beesley and Karttunen (2003, p. 339) points out, excluding ungrammatical
paths by composition of transducers can make the size of the resulting transducer
explode.
The first class in our grammar contains 334,284 noun and adjective entries from the
total of 361,485 in DGFL-ADJN. Seemingly improbable bases were filtered out, e. g.
diminutives (cf. *lapisinhozinho) and superlatives (cf. *rapidissimozinho from rapidíssimo
'very fast'). Augmentatives, however, were included, since diminutives derived from these
formations are considered grammatical (RIO-TORTO, 2016, p. 364) and attested in texts
on the Internet (e.g. casarãozinho from casarão, augmentative of casa 'house'). The other
classes of the LEXC grammar contain the diminutive suffixes, the gender morphemes, and
the number morphemes.
Diminutive formation in Portuguese involves a dependency relation between the
gender of the base and the gender marker, as exemplified in (26)-(29). This dependency is
non-local because the diminutive suffix intervenes between these two elements.
(26)

(27)

(28)

a. problem-inh-a
problem(M)-DIM-M.SG
b. problem-a-zinh-o
problem-M.SG-DIM-M.SG
a. trib-inh-o
tribe(F)-DIM-F.SG
b. trib-o-zinh-a
tribe-F.SG-DIM-F.SG
a. pont-inh-a
15

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

(29)

bridge(F)-DIM-F.SG
b. pont-e-zinh-a
bridge-F.SG-DIM-F.SG
a. dent-inh-o
tooth(M)-DIM-M.SG
b. dent-e-zinh-o
tooth-M.SG-DIM-M.SG

Examples (26)-(29) show that gender marking in Portuguese diminutives constitute
a complex phenomenon, because masculine gender can also be marked by a and
feminine gender by o, which are the canonical markers for feminine gender and masculine
gender, respectively, compare (26a) and (27a) with (26b), (27b), (28), and (29). Another
difficulty for the formalization is the opposing behaviour of -inh- and -zinh- in cases such as
(26) and (27): while the former selects the non-canonical markers, the latter selects the
canonical markers. In our LEXC grammar, these facts are handled by means of flag
diacritics in a linguistically intuitive way.
Morphographemic alternations were modeled by a cascade of 11 conditional
replacement rules. These rules follow the general template A --> B C _D, which informally
reads "substitute A for B in the context of C and D", where C is the left-hand and D the
right-hand context. This module includes, besides the orthographical changes from Table
5, plural -s deletion before z (azuis+zinhos => azuizinhos, plural diminutive of azul 'blue'),
thematic vowel deletion (casa+inha => casinha, diminutive of casa 'house'), optional
thematic e deletion in plurals like luzezinhas and florzinhas (producing luzinhas and
florzinhas) and stem i deletion before another i (e.g. cheiinho=>cheinho and
saiinha=>sainha, derived from cheio 'full' and saia 'skirt', respectively).
The current implementation is biased towards contemporary Brazilian Portuguese,
where the forms generated by the last two rules are attested in standard language texts
and considered grammatical20. Another consequence of the present limitation is that the
formation of diminutives like anelinho, which is only productive in European Portuguese,
was not implemented yet.
Both the LEXC grammar and the morphographemic alternations were compiled into
FSTs, which, in turn, were composed into one single FST, which we call DIM1 21. This FST
has almost 2 millions paths, but just a fraction is licensed by the unification constraints that
operate during analysis or generation. In fact, extracting the grammatical word-parse pairs
from DIM1 reveals that their number amounts to 625,716 pairs (see Table 6). In order to
reduce complexity, as proposed by (ALENCAR et al., 2014), these word-parse pairs where
compiled into a second FST using the read spaced-text command referred to in section 3.
This derived FST we designate by DIM2. Among other reasons, DIM2 is less complex than
DIM1 because there are no unification constraints to be solved.

20 On these forms, see Cipro Neto (s.n.t.) and Nogueira (2010). Double i deletion is not restricted to
diminutive formation, as evidenced by superlative forms like seríssimo, derived from seriíssimo 'very
serious' (CUNHA; CINTRA, 1985, p. 251).
21 Commented source code as well as all test sets referred to below are available in MorphoBr's repository.
The code compiles with both Foma and XFST.
16

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

Table 6: Comparison of the complexity of different FSTs compiled with Foma 22. The second column specifies
space in disk of the word-parse pairs and the third, FST size in memory.

FST

Description File

Memory

States

Arcs

Paths

DIM1

composition 22M
of LEXC
grammar
and
morphograp
hemic rules

2.8M

78336

185891

1958232

DIM2

compilation
of all wordparse pairs
from DIM1

22M

2.8M

77903

184804

625716

ADJN

all wordparse pairs
from DGFLADJN

10M

2.8M

80428

184975

361485

ALL

union of
DIM2 and
ADJN

32M (220)

3.6M (28.6) 93334 (16) 237254
(28.3)

977071
(170.3)

Table 6 compares the complexity of DIM2 to two other FSTs, which we label ADJN
and ALL. ADJN was compiled by applying the read spaced-text command to all wordparse pairs from DGFL-ADJN (i.e. the set of all nouns and adjectives that were converted
from DELAF-PB and GFL). ALL is the FST resulting from union of DIM2 and ADJN. The
last line of Table 6 allows us to assess coverage gain as well as the cost of uniting DIM2
with ADJN. The numbers in brackets show the percentage increases in relation to the
numbers in the penultimate line. ALL has 170,3% more paths than ADJN, but the
complexity cost in terms of FST size and number of arcs and states ranges from 16% to
28,6%. On the other hand, the word-parse pairs from ALL occupy 220% more space in
disk than those from ADJN.

5 Evaluation
In order to assess coverage and accuracy of our resource, experimental evaluation
was carried out in two different phases of the project development. In the first phase,
evaluation was restricted to MorphoBr's entries from DELAF-PB and GFL. Three
experiments were performed in this stage. First, these entries were used to lemmatize the
Universal Dependencies (henceforth UD) Portuguese GSD corpus. In this way, we could
have a measure of the resource's coverage on real-world data. In the next experiment, an
accuracy test was carried on Bosque (another Portuguese UD corpus), by comparing the
lemmas MorphoBr assigned to the words in this corpus to the ones Bosque actually had.
In the third experiment, we measured FreeLing's coverage of verb clitic-clusters by means
of suffix rules.
22 All transducers were also successfully compiled with XFST.
17

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

In the second project development phase, evaluation was restricted to the
diminutive entries created by the finite-state approach and encoded in DIM2. Coverage
comparisons were performed against the two previous relevant resources: (i) the set of
-(z)inh- diminutives from DGFL-ADJN, i.e. the set of all nouns and adjectives converted
from DELAF-PB and GFL, and (ii) FreeLing's suffix rules.
5.1

Improving GSD

The UD Portuguese GSD corpus was converted from the Google UD Treebanks
(MCDONALD et al., 2013) and it is now part of the UD project (NIVRE et al., 2017). Even
though the GSD corpus is officially an UD corpus, it is still considered incomplete, partly
because it does not contain the lemmas for its words 23. Following the UD guidelines, we
corrected the annotation of $ and %, which are wrongly tagged as NOUN instead of SYM
in the original corpus. Given a word form and the PoS tag of a token, we converted the
word form to lower-case and searched for the pair in MorphoBr. In this experiment, we only
consider the grammatical classes which are already part of our resource, i.e., verbs,
adjectives, adverbs, and nouns. The tokens with the remaining UD PoS tags were ignored.
The results of the experiments are classified in three cases: (i) missing: 2.8% of the
tokens have no lemma in MorphoBr (e.g. km, cerca, quarta, torcida, mensalão); (ii) unique:
93% of the tokens have a unique lemma in MorphoBr; (iii) multiple: 4.2% of the tokens
have more than one possible lemma (e.g. foi, foram, era). These results can be partly
explained by the many differences between the corpus annotations, UD guidelines, and
MorphoBr's design decisions. For instance, quarta 'fourth' and terceiro 'third' are
considered determinants in MorphoBr, not numerals as in the UD guidelines 24. On the
other hand, many missing lemmas are abbreviations such as TV and Km or parts of multiword expressions (MWEs) such as a cerca de 'regarding to', which are presently not
handled by MorphoBr. We also identified a few misspellings in the corpus. The true
missing words from MorphoBr are cases such as the nouns torcida 'supporters' (or
'cheering') and mensalão 'big monthly stipend' (neologism derived from the augmentative
of adjective mensal 'monthly')25.
5.2

Bosque comparison

We also compared our dictionary coverage to the UD-Portuguese-Bosque corpus.
Its original lemmatization was provided by the PALAVRAS system (BICK, 2014) and it was
manually revised. As in section 5.1, we used the pair (word form,PoS) to look up the
appropriate entries in MorphoBr. For each such pair, there could be a single value, multiple
values, or no values at all. We classified each of the 87,623 tokens in the corpus in four
cases: (i) 80,614 tokens (92%) have the same lemma, only one possible value for the
(word form,PoS) pair and it matches the lemma on the corpus; (ii) 1,025 tokens (1.16%)
have a different lemma, that is, the lemma in the corpus differ from the lemma in
MorphoBr; (iii) for 3,664 (4.1%) tokens MorphoBr contains more than one value (and thus
23 URL: https://github.com/universaldependencies/UD_Portuguese-GSD
24 URL: http://universaldependencies.org/u/pos/NUM.html
25 URL: https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explains/2013/11/18/what-is-brazils-mensalao
18

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

cannot be automatically compared to the lemma in the corpus); (iv) 2,320 tokens (2.6%)
where missing in MorphoBr.
Generally the issues with the difference between lemmas is due to MWEs and
proper noun tokenization, and also divergences between how to lemmatize words, as each
dictionary adopts a particular stance. For example, in the original Bosque corpus MWEs
were tokenized as a single unit (e.g. em termos 'in terms'). UD guidelines suggest that
these expressions should be split into tokens connected via the fixed dependency. It
seems that, when Bosque was converted to UD, the split was indeed performed, but the
MWE was not consistently lemmatized (e.g. 'em termos' was lemmatized as em and
termos, instead of em and termo). There are also divergences in how MorphoBr
lemmatizes certain words and how lemmatizations were done in Bosque. E.g., the
adjective maior 'greater' is lemmatized in MorphoBr as maior but in Bosque as grande
'big'. Nouns such as filha 'daughter' are lemmatized in MorphoBr as filho 'son', but in
Bosque as filha.
5.3

Comparison to DGFL-ADJN

In this section we evaluate our finite-state implementation of diminutive formation
with -(z)inh-, mainly comparing it to DGFL-ADJN. Comparison to FreeLing's affix rules is
the subject of section 5.4. Here, we first perform quantitative comparisons. Next, we
evaluate the implementation qualitatively, in order to assess to what extent it is
linguistically correct, in that the diminutives generated are grammatically well-formed. One
way to do that would be to ask human experts to provide grammaticality judgements.
However, since DIM2 contains more than half a million diminutives, a manual evaluation
seems not to be practical.
We have seen in section 4 that DGFL-ADJN only contains 10,338 word-parse pairs
with - (z)inh- diminutives, while DIM2 encodes 625,716 such pairs, which represents an
increase of 5,952.58%. Since diminutives in DIM2 were generated from noun and
adjective bases from DGFL-ADJN, it contains pairs that are already part of DGFL-ADJ.
However, DIM2 has 615,586 new -(z)inh- diminutives pairs. This amounts to an increase
of 5,854.59% or 59,5 times. On the other hand, there are only 208 such pairs in DGFLADJN which are not contained in DIM2. These include lexicalized irregular or dialectally
restricted formations as well as errors in DGFL-ADJ, as we will see below.
A qualitative evaluation of a finite-state implementation of a morphology fragment
involves two aspects: (i) whether the FST generates the correct forms from given analysis
strings and (ii) whether it provides the correct analysis strings for the given surface forms.
As evidenced by cases like cheinho, lapisinho, and alemãezinhos, commented on in
section 4, distribution of - (z)inh- as well as allomorphy depend on properties of the bases,
e.g. thematic class, stem-final or word-final grapheme, etc. Therefore, to test generation
from DIM2, we first manually compiled TEST-UP, comprising 208 analysis strings like
luz+N+DIM+F+PL, representing the diminutives of the different types of noun and
adjective bases in Portuguese. These types mainly derive from the exhaustive
classification of thematic classes of nouns and adjectives from Villalva and Silvestre
(2014), but cases discussed in Cipro Neto (s.n.t.), Nogueira (2010), and Rio-Torto (2016)
are also included. For TEST-UP, DIM2 generated the expected word forms.

19

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

Next, we tested both generation and analysis in comparison to DGFL-ADJN. To this
end, we extracted analysis strings and word forms of all -(z)inh- diminutives from DGFLADJN, resulting in the test sets D-UP with 9,303 items and D-LOW with 9,372 items,
exemplified in (30) and (31), respectively. DIM2 was then applied to both test sets, attaining 99,7% and 98,4% coverage, respectively. The strings that were not recognized by
DIM2 are missing items. For example, DIM2 does not produce any analysis for the word
form coleginha nor does it generate any surface form for the analysis string cebola+N+DIM+M+SG, so these strings are labeled missing items.
(30)

(31)

abalado+A+DIM+F+PL
abalado+A+DIM+F+SG
abalado+A+DIM+M+PL
abalado+A+DIM+M+SG
abaladazinha
abaladazinhas
abaladinha
abaladinhas
abaladinho
abaladinhos

Let us now see why these two types of items were not recognized, which caused
DIM2 to fall short of 100% coverage in the two test sets. Of the 150 missing items from DLOW, 88 are due to deviations from the standard language in DGFL-ADJN: 67 contain
orthographic errors, see (32), and 21 violate standard rules of diminutive formation, see
(33).
(32) *lebõezinhos (lebrõezinhos), *coleginha (coleguinha), *portuguezinho
(portuguesinho), *avózinha (avozinha), *carcaçinha (carcacinha), *paíszinho (paisinho)
(33) *azulzinhas (azuizinhas), *alemãozinhos (alemãezinhos), *probleminho
(probleminha)
A total of 12 missing items contain double ii in diminutives, e.g. cheiinho (from cheio
'full'). While these forms are standard in European Portuguese (RIO-TORTO, 2016, p.
364), in present Brazilian Portuguese, the corresponding variants with a single i are
preferred.
Most other missing items are irregular diminutives or result from dialectally
restricted formation processes. Many of these forms are lexicalized. There are 32 -inhdiminutives from stems ending in r,l, or u, e.g. jantarinho, animalinho, and nuinho, derived
from jantar 'dinner', animal 'animal', and nu 'naked', respectively. This type of formation is
not productive in Brazilian Portuguese. A total of 15 missing items represent idiosyncratic
formations, e.g. frangainho (from frango 'chicken'), varginha (from vargem 'floodplain'),
fontainha (from fontana 'fountain'), foicinho (masculine diminutive from feminine noun foice
'sickle'), etc.
From the remaining 3 missing items, 2 are bebezinha and bebezinhas, singular and
plural diminutive of feminine bebé 'baby', European Portuguese variant of Brazilian
20

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

Portuguese bebê. Since DGFL-ADJN only contains the homonym masculine forms bebé
und bebê, DIM2 only analyses the masculine diminutive forms. The other missing item is
rockzinhos, from whose plural form DIM2 built the attested variant rockezinhos.
Just one of the 28 missing items from D-UP can be considered a true error of DIM2,
namely calças+N+DIM+F+PL, whose lemma is the plurale tantum calças 'pants'. DIM2
only encodes calça+N+DIM+F+PL with the lemma in singular (which has a similar
meaning in Portuguese). The remaining missing strings are lexical representations for
which DGFL-ADJN provides no counterpart without the diminutive morpheme. These
cases seem to be either errors in the original resources or irregular formations. For
example, in DGFL-ADJN, cebola+N+DIM+M+SG maps to cebolinho 'chives'. The problem
with this lexical representation is that there is no masculine gender noun cebola 'onion' in
Portuguese, which is a feminine gender word. Regular diminutive formation is a gender
preserving process in Portuguese. This prevents the derivation of a masculine gender
noun such as cebolinho from a feminine gender noun. Accordingly, there is no lexical
representation cebola+N+M+SG in DGFL-ADJN, only cebola+N+F+SG, as expected, and
cebolo+N+M+SG, representing cebolo 'chives'.
In conclusion, due to the finite-state implementation of - (z)inh- diminutives compiled
into DIM2, MorphoBr contains 60 times more diminutives than ADJN, the transducer
DGFL-ADJN was compiled into. In morphological analysis, MorphoBr profits from a
division of labour between DIM2 and ADJN, since it includes both: while the former only
encodes regular, standard -(z)inh- diminutives (at least in Brazilian Portuguese), the latter
encodes irregular and non-standard forms. Therefore, MorphoBr has a much wider
coverage also in qualitative terms than the previous resources. This makes it far more
suitable for analysing texts where both standard and non-standard formations are used.
5.4

Comparison to FreeLing's suffix rules

We compared the coverage of MorphoBr's converted verb-clitic clusters and
diminutives generated by DIM2 against FreeLing 4.0 by checking if FreeLing recognizes
the word form either because it is in its dictionary or because of one of its suffix rules (see
section 2). To avoid any bias, all items without a lemma in FreeLing's dictionary were
discarded. Since many diminutives are categorially ambiguous between noun and
adjective, while sharing the same lemma, this category distinction was discarded and the
resulting repetitions eliminated. This resulted in two test sets of unique pairs of word forms
and lemmas: DIMINUTIVES, containing 415,098 diminutives, and V-CL-CLUSTERS with
893,796 verb clitic-clusters.
FreeLing missed 57.8% (240,074) of DIMINUTIVES, recognizing 1.3% (5,253)
directly via dictionary lookup and 40.9% (169,771) via affixation rules. An inspection of the
missed forms shows that FreeLing's rules do not handle the alternation between -inh- and
-zinh- uniformly. While both alegretinho and alegretezinho are correctly lemmatized to
alegrete 'planter', only alegrinho and elefantinho are lemmatized to alegre 'happy' and
elefante 'elephant', respectively, but not the equally possible (and attested) variants
alegrezinho and elefantezinho. The rules also fail to analyze plural forms like florezinhas,
luzezinhas, etc. (more than 4500 similar cases).
FreeLing missed 0.5% (4,779) of V-CL-CLUSTERS, recognized five items directly
21

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

via dictionary lookup and 99.5% (889,012) via affixation rules. A survey of the clusters
FreeLing failed to analyse reveals that about half are not grammatical. In these clusters,
clitic pronoun nos 'us' is attached to a verb form of the 2nd person plural of the future
subjunctive tense, e.g. zombarde-nos (zombar 'mock'). According to Cunha and Cintra
(1985, p. 399), this tense does not allow enclitics. FreeLing, however, did recognize
thousands of these forms with other clitics, e.g. zombarde-la. These findings point to the
need of revision of the treatment of clitic clusters by both MorphoBr and FreeLing.
Notwithstanding these problems, we can conclude that current FreeLing's affixation rules
for Portuguese are far more complete for clitics than for diminutives.

6 Conclusion
We have presented MorphoBr, a new wide-coverage full-form lexicon for
Portuguese, released under a free, open source software license. It represents a two-fold
contribution. First, previous freely-available resources were consolidated, removing
several thousands of errors and gaps. Entries were converted to a uniform format using
more mnemonic and linguistics-oriented tagging conventions. This format not only is more
human-readable but also allows for straightforward compilation of finite-state
morphological analysers.
MorphoBr, however, is not just a combination and correction of previous resources.
Its main contribution is the systematic treatment of word-formation by computationally
modeling the underlying linguistic regularities. As a test case of this approach, the
formation of -(z)inh- diminutives was implemented in the paradigm of finite-state
morphology. Previous resources either provide very incomplete lists of diminutives or
formulate ad hoc rules that cover only a small part of the cases. By contrast, our
systematic treatment of diminutive formation rules resulted in 170% more nouns and
adjectives than DELAF-PB's and FreeLing's dictionaries combined. As regards the total
amount of - (z)inh- diminutives, the finite-state implementation generated 60 times more
such items than listed in these previous resources.
MorphoBr is still work in progress, but the experimental evaluation results seem
promising. It clearly outperformed FreeLing's suffix rules in the coverage of - (z)inhdiminutives. This makes it more adequate for tasks dealing with texts where diminutives
are very common.
Regarding the FreeLing coverage test, we are aware of the fact that many missing
items could be avoided with improvements in FreeLing's affixation rules for Portuguese.
Nevertheless, we leave as a future work testing whether this type of rules can deal as
efficiently with all forms derived by our FST approach, which involves the formalization of
intricate phenomena both at the morphotactic and morphographemic levels.
Other future related work includes: expanding our FSTs with other productive wordformation rules, also taking into account particularities of European Portuguese; reviewing
the verb-clitic clusters and their annotation; dealing with MWEs; and implementing the
grammatical word classes, e.g. determinants, conjunctions, etc.
The latter topic requires, however, a clarification about the lexical representations of
these words, which, in turn, depends on the implementation of syntactic rules in a concrete
grammatical formalism, GF and LFG in the case of our project. This means that the exact
22

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

form of these entries can only be defined after developing grammar fragments in these
formalisms covering the relevant grammatical phenomena.
Acknowledgements
We are indebted to Fabricio Chalub for his contributions to a previous version of
Section 5.4. We also thank an anonymous reviewer for valuable comments and
suggestions.
References
ALENCAR, L. F. de et al. JMorpher: A Finite-State Morphological Parser in Java for
Android. In: BAPTISTA, J. et al. (Eds.). Computational Processing of the Portuguese
Language. 11th International Conference, PROPOR 2014. São Carlos/SP, Brazil, October
6-8, 2014. Proceedings... Heidelberg: Springer, 2014, p. 59-69.
BAZENGA, A. M. Sufixos avaliativos -inh-/-zinh- em português: da morfologia à
pragmática da ironia verbal. Pensardiverso, Funchal, v. 3, p. 115-130, 2012. Disponível
em: <https://digituma.uma.pt/handle/10400.13/1729>. Acesso em: 2 abr. 2018.
BEESLEY, K. R.; KARTTUNEN, L. Finite state morphology. Stanford, California: CSLI,
2003.
BICK, E. PALAVRAS: a constraint grammar-based parsing system for portuguese. In:
SARDINHA, T. B.; FERREIRA, T. L. S. B. (Org.). Working with Portuguese Corpora. [S.l.]:
Bloomsbury Academic, 2014. p. 279-302.
BUTT, M. et al. A Grammar Writer's Cookbook. Stanford, California: CSLI, 1999.
CIPRO NETO, P. Está errado dizer “cheinho" e “sainha"? In: CIPRO NETO, P. Dicas do
Pasquale.
[S.n.t.].
Disponível
em:
<http://www.educacional.com.br/espacopasquale/dicas.asp?intPagAtual=10&>.
Acesso
em: 11 mai. 2018.
COSTA, J. A.; MELO, S. Dicionário da Língua Portuguesa. 6. ed. Porto: Porto Editora,
1991.
CUNHA, C.; CINTRA, L. F. L. Nova gramática do português contemporâneo. Rio de
Janeiro: Nova Fronteira, 1985.
DIPPER, S. Implementing and documenting large-scale grammars – German LFG. 2003.
359 f. Tese (Doutorado) - Philosophisch-Historische Fakultät, Universidtät Stuttgart, 2003.
ELEUTÉRIO, S. et al. A system of electronic dictionaries of portuguese. Lingvisticae
Investigationes,
v.
19,
n.
1,
p.
57-82,
1995.
Disponível
em:
23

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

<http://label.ist.utl.pt/publications/docs/Eleuterio_et_al_95.pdf>. Acesso em: 18 set. 2018.
FALK, Y. Lexical-Functional Grammar: an introduction to parallel constraint-based syntax.
Stanford, California: CSLI, 2001.
FRADIN, B. Abbréviation des gloses morphologiques. Paris: Laboratoire de Linguistique
Formelle, Université Paris-Diderot, [s.d.]. Disponível em: <http://www.llf.cnrs.fr/fr/node/60>.
Acesso em: 16 set. 2018.
GARCIA, M.; GAMALLO, P. Análise morfossintáctica para português europeu e galego:
Problemas, soluções e avaliação. Linguamática, Braga, v. 2, n. 2, p. 59-67, 2010.
Disponível em: <http://linguamatica.com/index.php/linguamatica/article/view/56>. Acesso
em: 15 out. 2018.
GARCIA, M. et al. PoS-tagging the Web in Portuguese: national varieties, text typologies
and spelling systems. Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, v. 53, p. 95-101, 2014.
Disponível
em:
<http://www.taln.upf.edu/pages/sepln2014/full_papers/edited_paper_21.pdf>. Acesso em:
18 set. 2018.
HULDEN, M. Foma: a finite-state compiler and library. In: CONFERENCE OF THE
EUROPEAN CHAPTER OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS,
12, 2009, Athens. Proceedings... [S.l.]: Association for Computational Linguistics, 2009. p.
29-32. Disponível em: <http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/E09-2008>. Acesso em: 18 jun.
2018.
JURAFSKY, D.; MARTIN, J. H. Speech and language processing: an introduction to
natural language processing, computational linguistics, and speech recognition. 2. ed.
London: Pearson, 2009.
LAPA, M. R. Estilística da língua portuguesa. São Paulo: Martins Fontes, 1982.
LEACH, G.; WILSON, A. Recommendations for the morphosyntactic annotation of
corpora.
[S.n.t.],
1996.
Disponível
em:
<http://www.ilc.cnr.it/EAGLES/pub/eagles/corpora/annotate.ps.gz>. Acesso em: 15 set.
2018.
LIMA, R. Gramática normativa da língua portuguesa. 49. ed. Rio de Janeiro: José Olympio, 2011.
MONTEIRO, J. L. Morfologia portuguesa. 2. ed. Fortaleza: EDUFC, 1987.
MCDONALD, R. et al. Universal dependency annotation for multilingual parsing. In:
ANNUAL MEETING OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR COMPUTATIONAL LINGUISTICS, 51,
2013,
Sofia.
Proceedings...
[S.n.t.],
2013.
p.
92-97.
Disponível
em:
<https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P13-2017>. Acesso em: 18 set. 2018.

24

http://periodicos.letras.ufmg.br/index.php/textolivre
Belo Horizonte, v. 11, n. 3, p. 1-25, set.-dez. 2018 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.17851/1983-3652.11.3.1-25

MUNIZ, M. C. M. A construção de recursos lingüístico-computacionais para o português
do Brasil: o projeto Unitex-PB. 2004. 92 f. Dissertação (Mestrado em Ciências de Computação e Matemática Computacional) - Instituto de Ciências Matemáticas e de Computação, Universidade de São Paulo, São Carlos, 2004.
NIVRE, J. et al. Universal Dependencies 2.1. Prague: Institute of Formal and Applied
Linguistics (ÚFAL), Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, 2017
Disponível em: <http://hdl.handle.net/11234/1-2515>. Acesso em: 18 set. 2018.
NOGUEIRA, S. As luzinhas ou as luzezinhas de Natal? In: NOGUEIRA, S. Dicas de
português:
Temas
polêmicos.
[S.l.]:
Globo,
2010.
Disponível
em:
<http://g1.globo.com/educacao/blog/dicas-de-portugues/post/temas-polemicos-3.html>.
Acesso em: 15 mai. 2018.
PADRÓ, L.; STANILOVSKY, E. Freeling 3.0: Towards wider multilinguality. In: LANGUAGE
RESOURCES AND EVALUATION CONFERENCE, 8, 2012, Istambul. Proceedings...
[S.n.t.],
2012.
p.
2473-2479.
Disponível
em:
<http://www.lrecconf.org/proceedings/lrec2012/pdf/430_Paper.pdf>. Acesso em: 15 set. 2018.
POLLARD, C.; SAG, I. A. Head-driven phrase structure grammar. Stanford: CSLI, 1994.
RANCHHOD, E.; MOTA, C.; BAPTISTA, J. A computational lexicon of Portuguese for
automatic text parsing. In: STANDARDIZING LEXICAL RESOURCES, 1999, College Park,
Maryland.
Proceedings…
[S.n.t],
1999.
p.
74-80.
Disponível
em:
<http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W99-0511>. Acesso em: 15 set. 2018.
RANTA, A. Grammatical Framework: programming with multilingual grammars. Stanford,
California: CSLI, 2011.
RIO-TORTO, G. Formação de avaliativos. In: RIO-TORTO, G. et al. (Org.). Gramática
derivacional do português. Coimbra: Coimbra University Press, 2016. p. 357-389.
ROCHA, L. C. de A. Estruturas morfológicas do português. 2. ed. São Paulo: Martins
Fontes, 2008.
VILLALVA, A.; SILVESTRE, J. P. Introdução ao estudo do léxico: descrição e análise do
português. Petrópolis: Vozes, 2014.
ŠEVČÍKOVÁ, M. Modelling morphographemic alternations in derivation of Czech. The
Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, Prague, v. 110, p. 7-42, 2018. Disponível em:
<https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pbml/110/art-sevcikova.pdf>. Acesso em: 4 mai. 2018.
Recebido em dia 05 de outubro de 2018.
Aprovado em dia 12 de novembro de 2018.

25

