Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

DIGITAL STORIES: STUDENTS’ PERCEPTION OF FEEDBACK CONTRIBUTION
FOR SCRIPT DEVELOPMENT IN L2
HISTÓRIAS DIGITAIS: PERCEPÇÃO DE ALUNOS DA CONTRIBUIÇÃO DE
FEEDBACK PARA DESENVOLVIMENTO DE SCRIPT EM L2

Vanessa Rocha
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Brasil
vanessadedeusrocha@hotmail.com

Celso Henrique Soufen Tumolo
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Brasil
celsotumolo@yahoo.com.br

ABSTRACT: Feedback is an important topic in education, and particularly for language
development. This article intends to present some results of a research study aimed at
investigating students’ perception concerning the feedback received during the script
development in an L2 for the production of a digital story as well as the use made of the
received feedback. Participants were students from Letras Inglês course. During the
course, participants were required to develop a digital story, and feedback was provided
for the script development phase. After the production of their digital stories, they were
asked to answer a questionnaire and also participate in an interview, both focusing on their
perceptions concerning the feedback received. A comparison between the digital story (the
video) and the script with teacher’s feedback was also made to better understand the use
participants made of the feedback. Results showed that participants acknowledged the
relevance of feedback by emphasizing some aspects that were improved, such as the
organization of ideas, punctuation problems, and also the development of an awareness
for written productions. Concerning the use of the feedback received, results showed that
the production of the digital story (the video) was an encouragement for the incorporation
of the feedback received.
KEYWORDS: Feedback. Digital stories. Script development. Foreign language.
RESUMO: Feedback (“comentário”) é um tema importante na área da educação e, em
particular, para desenvolvimento de línguas. Este artigo apresenta alguns resultados de
uma pesquisa que teve como objetivo investigar a percepção de alunos em relação ao
feedback recebido durante o desenvolvimento do roteiro em uma L2 para a produção de
uma história digital, como também investigar o uso feito do feedback recebido.
Participantes foram estudantes de um curso de Letras Inglês. Durante o curso, os
participantes foram solicitados a desenvolver uma história digital e feedback foi fornecido
para a fase do desenvolvimento do roteiro. Após a produção das histórias digitais, os
participantes responderam a um questionário e também participaram de uma entrevista,
ambos focando em suas percepções sobre o feedback recebido. Uma comparação entre
a história digital (o vídeo) e o roteiro com o feedback do professor foi também feita para
melhor compreender o uso que os participantes fizeram do feedback. Resultados
mostraram que participantes reconhecem a relevância do feedback ao enfatizar alguns
aspectos que foram melhorados, como organização das ideias, pontuação, e também o
357

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

desenvolvimento de um conhecimento de produções escritas. Resultados também
mostraram que a produção da história digital foi um elemento motivador para a
incorporação do feedback recebido.
PALAVRAS-CHAVE: Feedback. Histórias digitais. Desenvolvimento de script. Língua
estrangeira.

1 Introduction
Learning is one of the cognitive processes that has attracted attention from scholars
and researches. However complex, it seems to be directly related to feedback (FB),
considering learners may need the assistance of someone with greater knowledge to
guide them throughout the process. Hattie and Timperley (2007, p. 81) define feedback as
information that can be provided by agents such as teachers, peers, books, parents,
among others, usually concerning aspects within the learning process.
There are studies in the literature discussing the effectiveness of written feedback
such as a study conducted with advanced students in which the revised drafts were
compared with its final version. The results showed that the written feedback received on
the draft version improved the final version of papers (FERRIS, 1997, p. 330). Another
study aiming at examining what kind of feedback teachers provide to pupils shed a light
into the use of written feedback as an assessment tool (BUDIMLIC, 2012, p. 1).There are
also other studies showing the efficacy of written feedback by presenting results in which a
group who received feedback outperformed a no-feedback group (BITCHENER; KNOCK,
2009, p. 206).
Feedback may be incorporated with the use of digital technology. One way is in the
realm of digital stories (DSs). Tumolo (2015) defines DS as a digital resource that
encompasses a variety of elements such as pictures, text, recorded oral narration, video
clips and/or music to produce a digital video to tell a story from a personal perspective. Its
production involves the development of its script for the audio narration of the story.
Literature seems to lack studies focusing specifically on feedback in activities
involving digital technology, such as the digital story. This study may contribute to fill this
gap. It had the objective of investigating students’ perception concerning the feedback
received during the script development in an L2 for the production of a digital story as well
as the use made of the received feedback, that is, it aimed at investigating students’: a)
perception of feedback contribution to language development; b) perception of feedback
contribution to their script development in English as their L2; and c) use made of the
feedback received.

2 Review of literature
Throughout the years, teachers and researchers have been trying to find ways that
can better support learners in terms of learning a foreign language. Providing feedback is
one of them and it may be possible within the use of digital stories. This section aims at
discussing possible definitions of written feedback as well as how to provide effective

358

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

ones. It also aims at briefly describing the steps to develop a DS focusing on the script
development.

2.1

Feedback: what does it mean?

The term feedback has been frequently used within the educational context to
define the process through which learners might become aware of their progress and
limitations concerning the target learning area. Vidal (2010, p. 184) asserts that feedback
might be understood as a languaging activity related to a full understanding of how the
target language works by reflecting about it.
Battistela and Lima (2015, apud OLIVEIRA; SILVA, 2017, p. 341) defined feedback
as ‘an answer to’ or ‘a reaction from’ the teacher to textual aspects, be them positive or
negative. In the latter case, suggestions about how the work can improve are provided.
However, to Oliveira and Silva (2017, p. 341), feedback should be understood as more
than a reaction or an answer, but as a set of attitudes guided by the teacher concerning
learners’ writing activities with the objective to provide better support of the writing skill.
For Keh (1990, p. 294), feedback can be defined as “input from a reader to a writer
with the effect of providing information to the writer for revision”. The author acknowledges
the relevance of writing developed as a process, which includes revision of the drafts
written by learners that will be read by more experienced readers, who are able to provide
comments and suggestions concerning lack of development of ideas, inappropriate word
choice or tense, among others.
Still according to Keh (1990, p. 294), there are three important steps considering the
writing process: (1) Generating ideas – brainstorming for first ideas; (2) Writing the first
draft – putting the ideas on a paper; (3) Revision – probably by a more experienced writer,
pointing to the gaps. This process may happen even more than once. Still in relation to the
third step, studies have shown that students value the comments they received on their
writings emphasizing that the process is diminished without someone to read it
(SOMMERS, 2006, p. 251).
Many authors have defined feedback and it is important to understand that its main
contribution is the result of a whole process as discussed by Keh (1990, p. 294), including
the process of brainstorming ideas, of writing as many drafts as necessary, and of revision
to write a good text. The drafting step seems to be relevant as reported by a study
developed with 72 university ESL students who received written feedback to self-edit their
texts. Results have shown that the group who received written feedback outperformed the
no-feedback group, which shows the positive contribution of written feedback to writing
skill development (FERRIS; ROBERTS, 2001, p. 176). Learners can better understand
their development once they can see improvement in the multiple drafts and consequently
in the final product, which means focusing on the process.
2.2

Effective written feedback

When dealing with written feedback provided in the language learning process,
scholars usually mention Corrective Feedback (CF), defined as a type of negative
359

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

feedback, because it only takes form when a learner makes a linguistic error (ELLIS,
2009a, p. 3). This may trigger direct or indirect feedback.
According to Ellis (2009b, p. 99), direct feedback may be understood as the type of
feedback in which the teacher indicates the error has been made and also indicates how
the correction would be. Indirect feedback, on the other hand, happens once the error is
just identified leaving the work to correct to the students, involving research for the
correction.
Indirect feedback implies a certain level of autonomy considering learners would
have to look for the answers on their own, based on more autonomous behavior.
According to Holec (1981, p. 3), autonomy is understood as “the ability to take charge of
one’s own learning”. With this autonomous behavior of playing an active role in their
learning process, it seems that learners may profit from indirect feedback.
Feedback, once effective, may contribute to learners’ language development.
Brookhart (2008, p. 6) advocates some elements for written effective feedback: clarity,
specificity, and tone. Clarity refers to learners’ understanding of what they are expected to
do to improve their writing skills. When providing written feedback, the teacher should thus
consider the level of learners and consequently choose a vocabulary they will be able to
comprehend.
Specificity is another relevant element. Feedback should be "not too narrow, nor too
broad” (BROOKHART, 2008, p. 33). She illustrates with an example in which the teacher
provided all the correct answers to students’ language problems and, once they were
asked to rewrite the activity, they just made editing changes to the work the teacher had
done. The idea, therefore, is to be specific so that learners can understand what they are
being required to do, but not too specific, to the point of doing all the job for them. The
author claims that comments such as ‘Write more!’ or ‘Try harder’ should be avoided
because they are too broad, considering the student would not know what to do to
improve, and the role of feedback is exactly to point to the direction in which this student
must move.
The last element mentioned by Brookhart (2008, p. 33) is tone. For oral activities,
teachers have the chance to talk to learners and make sure they understand the message.
However, when this message is written, teachers need to be more careful with the
vocabulary chosen because it might either inspire or discourage learners into the learning
process. The author also claims that providing only positive comments when there is the
need of some revision is not helpful at all once the learner might end up believing there is
no need of improvement.
In sum, for corrective feedback, a combination and/or a balance of direct and
indirect, involving the elements for effectiveness, must always be considered, and
teachers may resort to them according to the educational context.
2.3

Digital story: the script

Although digital stories did not emerge from the educational context, they can be a
powerful resource to support students in their learning process in general, and for L2
learning process in particular. Smeda, Dakich, Sharda (2013, p. 491) point out that the the
production of a digital story has the capability to engage students with the power of the
360

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

digital midia involved in the process. To develop a digital story, there are some steps
proposed to better contribute to the flow of the video production. The steps, described in
detail in Tumolo (2015; 2018), are presented here very briefly. The first step is to choose
the topic of the story. The second step is to write a script carefully with the story to be
narrated. The third step is to create the storyboard to organize the written text with the
digital media (images, etc) previously selected. The last step is to use computer software
to produce the video (JAKE, 2009).
Elaborated written texts must involve a process of revision by an external
experienced reader aiming at the final versions. In the process, changes are suggested for
improvements and they are returned as suggestions to the authors as feedback. The
script, as any written text, must have the same revision process. Its production was one of
the main sources for data collection of this study considering that a detailed analysis of the
material produced by the students in their target language along with the teacher’s
feedback was made. As aforementioned, there are different types of feedback and a
combination/balance of them may better support students in terms of language
development. Then, specifically concerning script development, this study aimed at
investigating the students’ perceptions concerning the feedback provided and their use of
the feedback received.

3 Method
This section intends to present the method for this qualitative study. As this study
aims at understanding students’ perceptions concerning written feedback, a qualitative
approach seemed to be a suitable one.
The data for this research was collected within the course on written skills
development, level 3, which is part of Letras Inglês undergraduate program from Federal
University of Santa Catarina.
The course was developed through 10 topics, and one of them was on stories.
Students were asked to develop the script, the storyboard, and produce the digital video,
that is, the digital story. The script and the written feedback provided by the teacher were
the data for this research. The final version of the script (the digital story) was also data for
this research considering that analyzing if students incorporated (or not) the feedback
previously received in their final version was one of the objectives of this research.
This research was submitted to CEP/CONEP and approved under the number
2.657.803.

3.1

Participants

The participants were students regularly attending the course on written skills
development, level 3, which is part of Letras Inglês course from Federal University of
Santa Catarina. The course was taught during their third semester when it is expected that
students have reached the intermediate level of language. Participants were the ones who
voluntarily accepted the invitation to take part in this research. The study was conducted
361

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

with eight participants – 2 males and 6 females, ages ranging from 18 to 53 years old.
Throughout the analysis, the participants were identified by the letter P followed by a
number attributed randomly.
3.2

Data collection

The present qualitative study had as data collection the following instruments: (1) a
questionnaire with 12 open questions concerning mostly the participants’ perception about
the contribution of feedback to their learning process; (2) a semi-structured interview with
questions concerning mostly the contribution of feedback to the development of a script
used for the production of a digital story. In addition to the instruments designed for the
data collection, data was also collected considering the scripts developed, the feedback
provided by the teacher, and the final version (turned into the audio-narration of the digital
story) for a comparison to determine the use students made of the feedback. With
participants’ consent, all this material was also used.
The procedures for data collection involved the following steps. The invitation to
take part of this study was sent by e-mail to all students regularly enrolled in the course
previously mentioned. The participants who accepted to take part of this study were
provided with information regarding the study throughout the Consent Form (Termo de
Consentimento Livre e Esclarecido). Then, they were invited to answer a questionnaire
administered in person on a date previously scheduled with the participant. The next step
for data collection was the interview, which was done individually and in person on a date
previously booked with the participants as well. All the data from the interview was
recorded in audio format and transcribed for further analysis. The questionnaire and the
interview were both in Portuguese.
It is relevant to mention that participants were asked about the feedback received in
all the assignments developed within the course so that they could argue about any
possible differences between the feedback received for the assignments and the feedback
received for the script development. In case they could not remember details of the
feedbacks, they were advised to access them available on the virtual environment
(Moodle).
3.3

Procedures for data analysis

The participants answered a questionnaire with the objective of providing data on
how they perceived the contribution of feedback to their language development. They also
participated in an interview with the objective of providing data on their perception
concerning the contribution of feedback during script development to the production of a
digital story. The data collected from the questionnaire and the interview were carefully
analyzed to answer the research questions proposed in this study.
A comparative analysis between the script with the feedback provided and the final
product (the digital story) was made to investigate if participants used (or not) the feedback
received. A comparison between what was being said in the digital story and the script with
the teacher’s feedback was made so that it was possible to investigate the use participants
have made of feedback received.
362

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

4 Results and Discussion
This section aims at presenting and discussing the results of this study concerning
students’ perception of feedback contribution to their script development and also
concerning their use of received feedback for their digital stories production. It is divided in
three: section 4.1 aims at discussing students’ perception of feedback contribution to their
language development; section 4.2 discusses students’ perception of feedback
contribution to the script development; and section 4.3 aims at discussing students’ use of
feedback received.
4.1
Students’
development

perception

of

feedback

contribution

to

their

language

This section aims at discussing the students’ perception of feedback contribution to
their language development. During the course, students developed written assignments
for the development of their language skills. For that, they received written feedback from
the teacher. The analysis showed that, in general, the participants acknowledged the
relevance of feedback contribution to their language development by stating that feedback
is what allows them to notice their errors and improve based on the suggestions and
comments received.
P4 argued during the interview:
I am sure feedback is extremely important... I think that actually ... it is like a guide so that we know
what we are doing right and what we are doing wrong... and to reassess what we have been doing
so far.

P4 seemed to understand the relevance of feedback for her language development
process due to the fact that it might be really hard to develop language without having the
assistance of someone with greater knowledge showing what needs improvement. The
participant argued that feedback is like a guide, which shows the acknowledgment of
feedback being relevant to language learning. Then, feedback plays a role in which
learners can identify aspects not identified without some assistance. Concerning that, P7
shared the same idea as P4 and also emphasized the relevance of having a different point
of view concerning written texts. P7 said in her questionnaire:
Feedbacks provide another point of view, showing us where and why we made mistakes and how
we can improve. This way we can improve our knowledge and our proficiency.

This assistance, according to P7, is quite relevant considering that having a
different person reading a text can elucidate aspects unnoticed by the learners. This is
what Keh (1990) proposed for this relation between teacher (reader) and students (writers)
considering this knowledge exchange seems to be profitable for both sides.
Generally speaking, students recognized the relevance of feedback contribution to
their language development considering that, from their perception, feedback is like a
guide from which they can better understand the aspects adequate to their writings but
also the aspects that are in need of improvements.
Next, more detailed analysis on the contribution of feedback perceived by the
participants is provided.
363

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

Students’ perception of how feedback should be provided to better contribute to their
language development
Effective written feedback should be provided in a way that learners can fully
understand what is being suggested by the teacher so that they can actually do something
with it and also have the chance to improve their writings based on feedback, return the
text to the teacher, and actually learn something out of the written comments received
(BROOKHART, 2008, p. 2).
There are different ways to provide feedback and learners may develop better with
specific ones. Then, when asked about how they believed feedback should be provided to
better contribute to their language learning process, participants seem to demonstrate that
feedback should directly point to their language use problems, as P2 stated in her
questionnaire:
Pointing where the student did right and where he did wrong, providing further explanation about
why it is wrong.

P2’s perception concerning the effectiveness of feedback to language development
goes beyond the idea of identifying aspects that need improvement; she also understands
that feedback should bring explanation concerning the errors identified. Maybe this further
explanation considered so relevant by P2 may be understood as the links and/or
suggestions made by teachers when providing feedback or even the indication of a book
or any other source in which learners can solve their own doubts.
Considering the answers in the questionnaire, it can be said that the participant
seems to have mostly a heteronomous behavior towards learning, that is, she emphasized
the relevance of receiving a direct feedback and also a direct correction concerning their
text. However, an important aspect for language development is autonomous behavior,
i.e., learners taking charge of their own learning process (HOLEC, 1981, p. 3).
Autonomous students should be able to find out the reasons for their errors in their texts
on their own, by searching and researching for answers.
P3 seemed to have a more autonomous behavior as his questionnaire shows:
Feedback should contain errors and the indication of possible solutions, and even clues to help or
collaborate to students learning and development.

P3 mentioned that feedback should contain “possible solutions and even clues”,
which gives the idea that the teachers may contribute by providing reliable sources for
references so that learners could find the answers on their own. Despite the importance of
developing autonomy, it is important to emphasize the contribution by the teacher. As P4
pointed out in her questionnaire:
[...] feedback needs to be clear concerning the notes and needed corrections. The student needs to
be sure about his “failures" and the access to the teacher to solve possible doubts should be
continuous.

As mentioned by P4, clarity is quite relevant for the feedback to fulfill its role
considering that if the learner is unable to comprehend what is being suggested/asked by
the teacher’s notes, it would be impossible to improve. However, if by any chance the
feedback is not clear enough, learners should have direct access to teachers as an
alternative to fully comprehend what they are expected to do. The sense of autonomy
should also come with a certain maturity level to understand that sometimes it would be
364

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

essential to solve the doubts with the teacher.
Students’ perception concerning the contribution of direct and indirect feedback to their
language development
There are different ways a teacher can provide written feedback to students. As
discussed previously, direct feedback happens once the teacher corrects a text and
provides the answers for the language problems while indirect feedback takes place once
the teacher just identifies the errors and/or provides means for students to find the
answers on their own (ELLIS, 2009b, p. 99).
Both types of feedback seem to contribute to language development. The direct one
provides students the opportunity to visualize directly how/what they should have written. It
leads us to consider that students can find the information and apply it in the next writing
activities, especially if it was just a mistake out of lack of attention. The indirect one, in
turn, demands a higher level of autonomy from students, based on the fact they would
have to spend some time trying to understand the reason for the errors and, based on the
teacher’s support, revise and improve the text.
The participants of this study received both types of feedback and it seemed
relevant to investigate what type of feedback students believe might better contribute to
their language development. In general, it is possible to say that most of the participants
stated that direct feedback seemed to better contribute to their language development. P1,
for example, stated in his questionnaire that:
When the problem is pointed, and corrected by the teacher because I believe I learn better when I
see the corrected activity.

P1 understands that feedback may better contribute to his language development
once the teacher identifies and also corrects the errors. When he uses the word “see”, it
may give the idea that his learning process is more visual, which means he learns better
once he can see what is wrong instead of having to go to another source on his own to
improve the writing. As P1, other participants seemed to prefer errors to be identified and
corrected by the teacher. P7 explained why direct feedback seemed to contribute better to
her language development process by arguing in the questionnaire that:
I think it is important to have both types of feedback. However, I prefer when the teacher shows what
I did wrong and how the correct way would be and also explain why. If the teacher just marks what I
did wrong, it may not cause an effect since I may not be able to see what is wrong or may not know
how to correct the text (even if I have the theory to be based on).

Despite believing that both types of feedback have their contribution, P7 seems to
believe direct feedback can better support her in terms of language development and she
also stresses that just having the errors identified by teachers may not be a useful solution
once she may not be able to know what she is expected to do. If a teacher is teaching
simple present, for example, and notices students are making errors concerning this tense,
maybe just identifying their mistakes in the text could be the option. However, if the content
students are making errors about is beyond what this teacher has worked in the
classroom, maybe direct feedback with pertinent explanations may have more effective
results.
Ferris (2006, p. 95) suggests that one of the possible reasons learners tend to use
direct feedback more effectively than indirect one is because it involves the idea of just
copying teacher’s sugestions or making simple editing changes in the next draft. The
365

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

author also points out that these editing changes may not contribute effectively to a long
term writing improvement. Concerning that, she believes indirect feedback seems to help
them develop more over time.
Students’ perception concerning direct feedback for language development
Considering the data collected for this study, it is possible to assert that participants
seemed to believe that direct feedback is the one able to contribute effectively to their
language development process. P7, for example, argued that the reason why direct
feedback might be more useful is due to the fact that understanding indirect feedback can
be difficult sometimes.
As pointed out throughout the review of literature, Brookhart (2008) claims that
feedback can only play its role once learners can fully understand their errors and also
what they are expected to do to improve. Another relevant aspect to be considered
regarding indirect feedback, if teacher’s notes are not clear enough to that specific learner,
feedback may become a quite demotivating factor to learners.
Carrol and Swain (1993, p. 362) assert that direct feedback is more helpful to learn
grammatical generalizations and they also point out that a more informative feedback in
which teachers explain clearly and directly students’ errors can contribute positively to their
language process. Direct feedback seems to be the one learners believe that can better
contribute to their language development, yet indirect feedback can also play a relevant
role considering it can prompt the development of students’ autonomous behavior towards
their learning. And considering this “difficulty” mentioned by P7 in understanding indirect
feedback, it is relevant to stress that despite the fact feedback is important to learning
development, learners can always have access to teachers to solve doubts, as P8
emphasized in her questionnaire:
I particularly prefer when the problem is directly pointed by the teacher. He does not need to give the
correct answer, but it is important that he provides texts and other theoretical references in which I
can find the problem and the solution. It is the student’s job to notice that if he does not fully
understand the feedback received, he should ask the teacher about that. But I believe that there are
some kinds of errors that require a more direct feedback pointing to the correct answer or at least a
direction should be pointed so that the problem can be understood.

Maybe “balance” is a good word when discussing what type of feedback should be
provided. As P8 pointed out, there are some types of errors that require a more direct
feedback, it is possible to infer that the type of errors learners believe feedback can better
contribute are mostly grammar errors. Despite the fact P8 seems to develop better with
direct feedback as mentioned in the excerpt above, she also emphasizes the idea of the
teacher providing sources so that she could solve the problem by herself, which shows the
autonomy learners are expected to have.
Indirect feedback should not be discarded due to its contribution not just to
language development, but also to learners’ autonomy. In this sense, the nature of the
error seemed to have a huge influence on participants’ development concerning the type
of feedback received. If the error concerned grammar, specifically a subject they have
already studied, they seemed to believe the indirect feedback would better apply because
it may have been due to lack of attention, which means if the teacher just identifies the
problem, students would be able to correct it by themselves. P6 approached this topic
during the interview stating that:

366

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

It depends ... if it is a normal error... grammatical... I prefer that he just identifies and I work to
discover the answer... if it is something more complex, I don’t know ... something...as it
happened ...it wasn't just an error ... I made errors like verbal agreement, or used a pronoun or an
article incorrectly ... it is always simple things that if he just made a circle, maybe just to see the
circle I notice what I did wrong, right? But maybe if it is something more complex ... as it
happened ... somethings he just put... he even replaced by red ... he corrected. Then I think that
both feedbacks are important, it just depends a little on what is the correction, got it?

P6 seems to believe that simple errors should be pointed indirectly because those
errors are “normal” errors, probably studied before and, in this case, a simple indication
should be enough. P6 added that once the error became complicated, a more direct
approach seemed to be the best option due to the fact learners would not be able to
correct them by themselves. Having that in mind, it is possible to stress that feedback
concerning text structure might work better by being strictly direct because learners would
be directly pointed to the aspects that need improvement, not leaving room for lack of
understanding of received feedback.
In sum, concerning students’ perception about feedback contribution to their
language development, it seems that they identify better with direct feedback and believe
direct feedback can better support them in terms of language development, although they
recognize the contribution of indirect feedback specifically related to the type of error
made. Next section aims at discussing students’ perception of feedback contribution
specifically during a script development to be later used in a digital story production.
4.2

Students’ perception of feedback contribution to script development

This section aims at discussing the students’ perception of feedback contribution to
script development. During the course, students developed a script for their digital stories.
For that, they received written feedback from the teacher. The analysis showed that, in
general, participants acknowledge the relevance of feedback. P3 said:
[...] I believe that feedback to script development was essential so that I could better organize my
ideas to the digital story improving the text structure that would be spoken throughout the video and
better centralizing the focus of the first ideas.

P3 mentioned, like other participants, two aspects when discussing the
development of the digital story: organizing the ideas and improving the text structure.
Feedback is not supposed to support learners just in terms of language problems, but it
should also support learners in terms of organizing how the ideas are presented.
Understanding that a digital story would become a video that later could be seen by other
people, participants seemed to have a concern with the quality of the message, observing
the feedback received seemed to be one of the ways to ensure that the message would be
conveyed as expected. Castañedas (2013, p. 51) developed a digital story study with high
school students in which she states that when providing feedback there should be a
concern with the author’s intention. It means there should be an understanding between
the feedback provided and the message the author wants to deliver.
Another feedback contribution was the development of an awareness regarding the
type of language required to write this type of text. Despite the fact the script was a writing
activity, there were certain aspects which differed from what they had been doing in other
courses. It was a written text that would become an oral text – the audio narration – with
pictures and music, and those aspects had to be taken into account. As mentioned by P3
367

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

in her questionnaire:
The script feedback contributed to clarify the difference between academic writing and script writing.

P3 pointed out that some attention had to be paid to linguistic choices concerning
the script production. This may mean that this participant noticed that the kind of language
required was different from the language required in the other written productions in the
course. Also referring to the feedback, P5 pointed out in her questionnaire:
The script feedback was really relevant because I could identify some important aspects. I realized,
for example, that the sentences were too elaborated and I simplified them in the storyboard
construction.

P5 seems to have focused on the audience who would watch the video of the digital
story and also on the type of text she was producing which, unlike academic texts, do not
require elaborated sentences. Academic writing requires a certain level of elaboration in
the sentences, but the script to be turned into a digital story does not. Then, it is possible
to conclude that one relevant contribution of the feedback was to develop students’
awareness concerning the genre of the text they were writing.
Another aspect mentioned by the participants was the contribution of the feedback
for language problems. Having another reader to revise a text seemed to be a positive
feedback contribution so that minor language problems that had not been noticed by the
author could be improved. P6 pointed out that relevance of having an external reader, the
teacher, in his questionnaire, by stating that:
I have done some corrections related to grammar errors and a few changes in the text because I
noticed the way it was received by the reader, in this case, the teacher.

P6 stressed that having an external reader revising the text can support learners in
terms of how the message intended is received by this reader. Concerning the same
subject, in the interview, P3 argued that:
[...] when someone gives an opinion, someone from outside, you end up seeing the errors you could
not see before ... adding or eliminating the excess. [...]

These excerpts by P6 and P3 show the importance of revising and providing
feedback. If the idea was to support learners in terms of writing skill development, having
someone else read the text and provide feedback can certainly allow the writer to see
some language aspects that were not seen before. This effective contribution of the
revising process and feedback to the whole language learning process, also reported by
Ferris (1997), could be seen in this research when the versions of the script were
compared, actually showing improvements, also further discussed in the following section.
In the interview, P6 also provided an example concerning how important it is to have
someone else reading the text to identify whether the text is actually as clear to the reader
as it is to the writer.
[...] Sometimes I feel that the teacher understood in a different way... then I see if it is the case to
change to make it clearer... for example I changed in my script because I wrote that I met Ulysses,
then he wrote an observation saying - not the guy, the book, right? - Then I modified the writing to
make it clearer [...]

P6 emphasized the idea that having an external reader to revise a text may be
useful so that there would not be any ambiguity in the writing, problems that were not
noticed by the writer. Clarity of ideas is certainly a good characteristic of a well written text
and participants of this research seemed to have acknowledged feedback contribution
368

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

concerning the organization of ideas to make them as clear as possible in the written text.
Participants also seemed to have the perception that language aspects such as
grammar problems, text structure and even the level of language to be used on a script
are among the feedback contributions during the development of the digital story.
Considering the nature of this study, it was expected that learners had identified grammar
errors as at least one of the most relevant feedback contributions during script
development to their language learning process. However, it is relevant to mention that
other aspects, such as ambiguity, the organization of the ideas to be presented, the
message intended to be conveyed, among others, seemed to have called their attention
even more than any grammar problems they might have had.
Next, more detailed analysis of the feedback received is provided.
Students’ attention concerning the feedback received
It has been discussed throughout this analysis how important it is that students fully
understand what they are required to do when receiving feedback (BROOKHART, 2008, p.
2). Considering that, it seemed relevant to investigate students’ attention when receiving
feedback.
Based on the definitions of feedback presented in the review of literature, it is
possible to assume that feedback can be understood as a result of teacher’s effort to call
students’ attention to language aspects that need improvement. It involves a series of
choices that need to be made so that learners can receive the most effective feedback and
actually learn from that.
In order for this learning moment to happen, learners must spend some time to read
the feedback received trying to better understand the aspects that need improvement and
decide what to do with that information, including the expected search and research to find
the answers for the indirect feedback provided by the teacher. All the participants who took
part in this study stated that they usually read all teacher’s notes from received feedbacks.
P2, for example, stated in the questionnaire:
[...] I like to see whether I understood the subject or not.

P2 seems to understand feedback as a guide and her attention to received
feedback seems to be directly connected to the fact that she wants to be sure whether she
understood the topics being approached or not and feedback seems to provide her this
information.
Considering that students had instructions concerning language aspects – grammar
and vocabulary – and text organization during classes, it would be possible to say that
once they are required to write texts, they are actually using what was learned, then
feedback may be understood as a thermometer which tells learners the aspects in need of
improvement and also the direction to follow. Still concerning this, P3 asserted in the
questionnaire that:
Most times I read attentively so that I can understand what the error is. If it was caused by lack of
knowledge or attention

Identifying the cause of the error seemed to be relevant, as mentioned by P3, either
as lack of knowledge or of attention.

369

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

Criteria to consider or not the feedback received
As aforementioned, students usually read carefully the feedback received as an
attempt to improve their knowledge in the target language. However, reading is not the
same as considering everything that was suggested, so it seemed relevant to investigate
whether learners considered or not the feedback received and based on which criteria they
chose to consider or not. Most participants emphasized the idea that teachers know better
so they usually consider everything that was suggested in the feedback. This is pointed
out by P8:
Yes, I usually take into account the feedback provided by the teacher because I understand that
many teachers have professional experience with technical and theoretical knowledge that I also
want to acquire and/or improve.

P8 seems to recognize the professional background teachers have and it seems to
be reason enough to usually consider the feedback received in the written activities.
Certainly, this is a solid justification to consider feedback. Miller’s (2014) points out that the
participants of her study also emphasized the idea of relying on the teachers’ feedback
due to their professional background. They also stated that they expect teachers to mark
most errors in their texts, which shows their trust in teacher’s professional backgrounds to
improve their drafts.Participants also pointed out that teacher’s feedback is the first thing
they consider when writing a revised draft. Concerning the same subject, when asked if
the feedback provided by the teacher was often considered, P4 asserted that:
Always because teacher’s intention when delivering feedback is to provide reflection about the
errors or aspects that need improvement.

P4 adds another justification for considering the feedback: promoting reflection
concerning errors. This seems to be one of feedback’s roles for effective learning to
happen from received feedback. In spite of the general acceptance of the teachers’
suggestions and comments, not all participants shared the same idea. P3, for example,
argued in the questionnaire that:
I frequently consider it. Sometimes I disagree and ignore because it is something that will take too
much time for me to actually learn and I try to control and divide my time with other academic
activities.

The amount of activities from other courses which generate in lack of time seems to
be one of the criteria used by P3 to consider or not the feedback received. However, the
contribution feedback may provide in language courses may spread to other courses as
well.
Improvement seems to be the main goal of teachers for feedback. On this, P4 and
P5 shared the same idea that feedback was usually taken into account with the intention to
improve in the following activities. In their questionnaires, they argued that:
Understanding the reason why the correction was made and what can be improved not just in the
following activities, but also in the revised activity. (P4)
I read more carefully the teacher’s feedback with the objective to identify the aspects that need
improvement and try to develop them with the practice of the language. (P5)

Both participants, P4 and P5, seem to use the criteria of improvement in the target
language to consider or not teachers’ comments and suggestions in their texts. P4 even
used the word “understanding” which might mean that feedback is more than looking at
the corrections: it is all about understanding the reasons why the correction was suggested

370

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

and consequently understand why the error was made.
Comprehending the reason for the error seemed relevant in this process, as also
mentioned by P7, who stated in the questionnaire that:
[...] It is important to take into account the suggestions provided because they can help not to make
the same errors and even learn why the error was made.

P7 stresses the importance of feedback in terms of preventing the same errors in
the following activities of the same nature and considering the suggestions and comments
were made to improve the text, accepting them seemed to be an effective way to improve
the writing.
In addition to the aspects mentioned that may lead learners’ attention towards
received feedback, another one was grading. Participants stated that once there was
grading involved, they tended to read teacher’s notes upon the received feedback more
carefully. This was stated by P3 in the questionnaire who emphasized the idea of
considering feedback to improve the grade.
Understanding better the abilities I should improve in the following activities. And out of my effort to
improve my performance, I develop language and also the grade.

Grading seems to be one of the criteria used by P3 to consider and consequently
improve the text but it is also relevant to emphasize that despite the fact P3 mentioned
grading, she also mentioned “develop language” which might mean that improving the
grading is just a consequence.
P8 argued in the questionnaire that even if the grade was good, feedback was still
relevant:
[...] Even when the grade is good, I believe that feedback is important because there is always an
aspect that can be improved. Feedback is an essential tool so that it is possible to develop learning
concerning a specific subject in a flowing way and also understand better my weak and strong
aspects so that I could improve them.

P8 states that, even when the grade is good, there is always some aspect that can
be improved, which means that, despite the grade, feedback seems to be always useful.
In sum, considering the discussion of this section, it is possible to assume that
participants actually read attentively the feedback received, at least most of the times. The
reason for the mistake was an important aspect. Once learners were able to identify an
error caused by lack of attention, it would be possible for them to revise the text without
the need of any other support and avoid making the same error. However, once lack of
knowledge was identified to be the main reason for the error, learners may do their own
search and research as an attempt to solve the problem and, in case the doubt, asking
teachers for support seems to be a plausible alternative. They can only identify the causes
of the errors made by paying attention to received feedback.
Next section will discuss the use participants made of the feedback received during
script development.
4.3

Students’ use of feedback received

This section aims at discussing whether the students incorporated feedback
received into their final versions of the script or not. During the course, students developed
371

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

a script for their digital stories. For that, they received written feedback from the teacher.
The analysis of the versions, with comparison of the first version with the final version,
showed that, in general, students incorporated the feedback provided by the teacher. Also,
it was possible to notice that sometimes participants had the tendency to change the
whole sentence instead of just changing the aspects the teacher called attention to.
Comparing the scripts with the feedback provided, it was noted that participants made
considerable changes in their texts by adding totally new sentences or even deleting some
part of their first version.
Considering carefully and incorporating the feedback provided was affected by the
production of the video for the digital story. In the interviews, participants acknowledged
that the possibility of their stories to be viewed by others encouraged them to revise their
script which would become the audio narration of their stories. P3, for example, said:
I think that when you do something people will see, you tend to ‘police’ yourself, right? You think to
yourself: ‘I will be judged by a lot of people.... a lot of people will see my mistakes’...so I believe that
when it is so, you tend to be smarter.

P5 said:
[...] so I think that people pay closer attention to the script on this issue because we are going to
develop a story that others might see, so it is important to have a well-written text…so I think that the
attention is much bigger.

P6 said:
[...] if the teacher noticed mistakes, everyone else might also, right? It is a way of knowing that in
advance, right?

In addition to having the stories, with possible mistakes, judged by others, the fact
there was a follow-up activity going beyond teacher’s readings and revisions seemed to
have a positive contribution for the incorporation of feedback received. P4 said:
Yes, for sure, much more likely, right? The feedback was important because, unlike the assignments
requiring revision and resend, in this case we had a follow-up. We needed to use the text for a
second phase…then the attention was doubled so that the final work would be cool [...].

Also, P6 added:
[...] as there is the follow-up assignment, the most important in the course...of course, I paid closer
attention to the script and the feedback give on it [...]

In sum, focusing on the use students made of the feedback received, it was
possible to say that participants of this study seemed to pay close attention to written
feedback received. Feedback was, in general, incorporated into their final versions and
sometimes, as mentioned before, participants chose to change the whole sentence which
may indicate that they wanted to use a structure they felt more confident with. Also, having
the production of the video had a positive influence in the incorporation of the feedback
provided into a revised script for the audio narration of the digital stories for two main
reasons: a) the possibility of the digital story to be viewed and its mistakes to be judged by
others; and b) the fact there was a follow-up activity going beyond teacher’s readings and
revisions.

372

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

5 Final remarks
This research intended to investigate feedback contribution to language
development from the perspective of learners as an attempt to better understand whether
it has been supporting them in the way it is expected. Results have shown that, generally
speaking, students seemed to acknowledge the relevance of feedback to their language
development, specifically to the development of their writing skill, which was the main
focus of this study.
There were many aspects involved when discussing the effectiveness of feedback
and the attention learners provided to received written feedback was one of them. Based
on the results, it was possible to assume that feedback could only play its role once
students decided to reflect upon teacher’s comments and suggestions which were made
with the specific objective of supporting learners in terms of learning development. This
study has shown that most students actually read attentively teacher’s feedback notes
usually as an attempt to improve their learning process.
This research also focused on discussing the contribution of direct and indirect
feedback. Students seemed to understand that direct feedback was a better contribution to
their language development than indirect one, considering they found relevant that the
teacher provided the correct answer because, once they see the error and its correction,
they tend to avoid it in the following activity. Despite the fact students considered direct
feedback to be a better contribution, they also emphasized that the nature of the error
should be taken into account for the most effective type of feedback. Once the errors were
strictly grammatical concerning topics already studied, they considered lack of attention as
the cause and direct feedback as the most effective procedure. However, once the error
was related to more complex issues such as text organization or even a more advanced
grammar structure, they considered lack of knowledge as the cause and indirect feedback
as the most effective procedure, since it requires search and research for the necessary
knowledge to writing improvement.
Feedback received was incorporated into their final versions of the script for the
audio narration of the digital stories by most participants, sometimes with considerable
changes. The reflection upon the feedback and the opportunity to reread their own texts
with the feedback showed them the need to change their texts for improvement. Also,
feedback was incorporated mostly because there was a follow-up activity going beyond
teacher’s readings and revisions and the digital story based on the revised script could be
viewed and mistakes could be judged by others.

References
BITCHENER, J.; KNOCK, U. The contribution of written corrective feedback to language
development: a ten month investigation. Oxford University press, 2009.
BROOKHART, S. M. How to give effective feedback to your students. 2.ed. Virginia, USA:
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development, 2008.
BUDIMLIC, D. Written feedback in English.Teacher’s practices and cognition, 2012.
373

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

CARROL, S; SWAIN, M. Explicit and implicit negative feedback: An empirical study of the
learning of linguistic generalizations. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, v. 15, p.
357-366, 1993.
CASTAÑEDAS, M. “I am proud that I did and it’s a piece of me”: Digital Storytelling in the
foreigh language classroom. CALICO journal, v. 30, n. 1, p. 44-62, 2013.
ELLIS, R. Corrective feedback and teacher development. L2 journal, v. 1, n. 1, p. 97-107,
2009a.
ELLIS, R. A typology of written Corrective Feedback types. ELT Journal, v. 63, n. 2, p. 97107, 2009b.
FERRIS, D. R,; ROBERTS, B. Error feedback in L2 writing classes: How explicit does it
need to be? Journal of Second Language Writing, v. 10, n. 3, p. 161-184, 2001.
FERRIS, D. R. The influence of teacher commentary on students revision. TESOL
Quarterly, v. 31, n. 2, p. 315-339, summer 1997.
FERRIS, D. Does error feedback help student writers? New evidence on the short- and
long-term effects of written error correction. In: HYLAND, K; HYLAND, F. (eds.), Feedback
in Second Language Writing: contexts and Issues. Cambridge Applied Linguistics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006. p. 81-104.
HATTIE, J; TIMPERLEY, H. The power of feedback. Review of Educational Research, v.
77, n. 1, p. 81-112, 2007.
HOLEC, H. Autonomy and foreign language learning. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1981.
JAKE, D. S. Capturing Stories, Capturing lives: an introduction to Digital Stories. Illinois,
2009.
KEH, C. L. Feedback in the writing process: a model and methods for implementation. ELT
Journal, v. 44, n. 4, p. 294-304, October 1990.
MILLER, C. How much feedback is enough?: Instructor practices and student attitude
towards error treatment in second language writing. Purdue University, United States,
2014.
OLIVEIRA, M. N. de.; SILVA, M. Z. V. da. A prática do feedback no ensino da escrita em
língua inglesa. Revista Diálogo das Letras, v. 6, n. 1, p. 340-362, 2017.
SMEDA, N.; DAKICH, E.; SHARDA, N.; The effectiveness of digital story in the
classrooms: a case study. Victória University, Melbourne, Australia. 13th international
conference on advanced learning technologies, 2013.
SOMMERS, N. Across the drafts, College Composition and Communication, v. 58, n. 2, p.
374

Belo Horizonte, v. 13, n. 3, p. 357-375, set.-dez. 2020 – ISSN 1983-3652
DOI: 10.35699/1983-3652.2020.25106

248-25, 2006.
TUMOLO, C. H. S. Histórias Digitais como recurso para ensino/aprendizagem de inglês
como Língua Estrangeira. Estudos Anglo Americanos, n. 43, 2015.
TUMOLO, C. H. S. Digital Stories for L2 and their development process. Revista
Horizontes de Linguística Aplicada, 17, n. 1, p. 15-30, 2018.
VIDAL, R. T. Instrução-focada-na-forma, lingualização e aprendizagem de ILE por
aprendizes brasileiros. Revista Brasileira de Linguística Aplicada. Belo Horizonte, v. 10, n.
1, p. 179-205, 2010.
Recebido em dia 03 de junho de 2020.
Aprovado em dia 03 de julho de 2020.

375

